SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
U NIT VI: C HAPTER 1; 1.1, P AGE 6
AT THE END OF FIRST PARA
Under unfavourable condition the Amoeba withdraws its pseudopodia
and secretes a three-layered hard covering or cyst around itself. This
phenomenon is termed as encystation. When favourable conditions
return, the encysted Amoeba divides by multiple fission and produces
many minute amoeba or pseudopodiospores; the cyst wall bursts out,
and the spores are liberated in the surrounding medium to grow up into
many amoebae. This phenomenon is known as sporulation.
U NIT VI: C HAPTER 1; 1.1, P AGE 7
AT THE END OF SECOND PARA
In some organisms, if the body breaks into distinct pieces (fragments)
each fragment grows into an adult capable of producing offspring (e.g.,
Hydra). This is also a mode of asexual reproduction called
fragmentation.
U NIT VII: C HAPTER 5; P AGE 85 ( TO
BE GIVEN AS SECTION
5.4)
P OLYGENIC I NHERITANCE
Mendel’s studies mainly described those traits that have distinct alternate
forms such as flower colour which are either purple or white. But if you
look around you will find that there are many traits which are not so
distinct in their occurrence and are spread across a gradient. For example,
in humans we don’t just have tall or short people as two distinct
alternatives but a whole range of possible heights. Such traits are generally
controlled by three or more genes and are thus called as polygenic traits.
2017-18BIOLOGY
Besides the involvement of multiple genes polygenic inheritance also takes
into account the influence of environment. Human skin colour is another
classic example for this. In a polygenic trait the phenotype reflects the
contribution of each allele, i.e., the effect of each allele is additive. To
understand this better let us assume that three genes A, B, C control skin
colour in human with the dominant forms A, B and C responsible for dark
skin colour and the recessive forms a, b and c for light skin colour. The
genotype with all the dominant alleles (AABBCC) will have the darkest skin
colour and that with all the recessive alleles (aabbcc) will have the lightest
skin colour. As expected the genotype with three dominant alleles and three
recessive alleles will have an intermediate skin colour. In this manner the
number of each type of alleles in the genotype would determine the darkness
or lightness of the skin in an individual.
U NIT VII: C HAPTER 5; P AGE 85 ( TO
BE GIVEN AS SECTION
5.5)
P LEIOTROPY
We have so far seen the effect of a gene on a single phenotype or trait.
There are however instances where a single gene can exhibit multiple
phenotypic expression. Such a gene is called a pleiotropic gene. The
underlying mechanism of pleiotropy in most cases is the effect of a gene
on metabolic pathways which contributes towards different phenotypes.
An example of this is the disease phenylketonuria, which occurs in
humans. The disease is caused by mutation in the gene that codes for the
enzyme phenyl alanine hydroxylase (single gene mutation). This manifests
itself through phenotypic expression characterised by mental
retardation and a reduction in hair and skin pigmentation.
U NIT VII: C HAPTER 5; P AGE 86 ( TO
S EX D ETERMINATION
IN
BE GIVEN AS SECTION
5.6.2)
H ONEY B EE
The sex determination in honey bee is based on the number of sets of
chromosomes an individual receives. An offspring formed from the union
of a sperm and an egg develops as a female (queen or worker), and an
unfertilised egg develops as a male (drone) by means of parthenogenesis.
This means that the males have half the number of chromosomes than that
of a female. The females are diploid having 32 chromosomes and males are
haploid, i.e., having 16 chromosomes. This is called as haplodiploid sex-
determination system and has special characteristic features such as the
males produce sperms by mitosis (Figure 5.13), they do not have father
and thus cannot have sons, but have a grandfather and can have grandsons.
288
Fig.5.13 Sex determination in honey bee
2017-18SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
U NIT VII: C HAPTER 5; 5.8.2, P AGE 89
AFTER FIRST PARA
C OLOUR B LINDNESS
It is a sex-linked recessive disorder due to defect in either red or green
cone of eye resulting in failure to discriminate between red and green
colour. This defect is due to mutation in certain genes present in the X
chromosome. It occurs in about 8 per cent of males and only about 0.4
per cent of females. This is because the genes that lead to red-green colour
blindness are on the X chromosome. Males have only one X chromosome
and females have two. The son of a woman who carries the gene has a 50
per cent chance of being colour blind. The mother is not herself colour
blind because the gene is recessive. That means that its effect is suppressed
by her matching dominant normal gene. A daughter will not normally be
colour blind, unless her mother is a carrier and her father is colour blind.
U NIT VII: C HAPTER 5; 5.8.2, P AGE 90
AFTER SECOND PARA
T HALASSEMIA
This is also an autosome -linked recessive blood disease transmitted from
parents to the offspring when both the partners are unaffected carrier for
the gene (or heterozygous). The defect could be due to either mutation or
deletion which ultimately results in reduced rate of synthesis of one of the
globin chains (á and â chains) that make up haemoglobin. This causes the
formation of abnormal haemoglobin molecules resulting into anaemia which
is characteristic of the disease. Thalassemia can be classified according to
which chain of the haemoglobin molecule is affected. In á Thalassemia,
production of á globin chain is affected while in â Thalassemia, production
of â globin chain is affected. á Thalassemia is controlled by two closely
linked genes HBA1 and HBA2 on chromosome 16 of each parent and it is
observed due to mutation or deletion of one or more of the four genes. The
more genes affected, the less alpha globin molecules produced. While â
Thalassemia is controlled by a single gene HBB on chromosome 11 of each
parent and occurs due to mutation of one or both the genes. Thalassemia
differs from sickle-cell anaemia in that the former is a quantitative problem
of synthesising too few globin molecules while the latter is a qualitative
problem of synthesising an incorrectly functioning globin.
U NIT VII: C HAPTER 7; 7.3, P AGE 129
AFTER SECOND PARA
Embryological support for evolution was also proposed by Ernst Heckel
based upon the observation of certain features during embryonic stage
common to all vertebrates that are absent in adult. For example, the
embryos of all vertebrates including human develop a row of vestigial gill
slit just behind the head but it is a functional organ only in fish and not
found in any other adult vertebrates. However, this proposal was
disapproved on careful study performed by Karl Ernst von Baer. He noted
that embryos never pass through the adult stages of other animals.
289
2017-18BIOLOGY
U NIT X: C HAPTER 13; 13.1, P AGE 221
AT THE END OF FIRST
PARA
Each organism has an invariably defined range of conditions that it can
tolerate, diversity in the resources it utilises and a distinct functional role
in the ecological system, all these together comprise its niche.
U NIT X: C HAPTER 15; P AGE 266
IN FOURTH LINE OF
15.2.2
AFTER THE WORD THREATENED
(organisms facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near
future)
290
2017-18
CHAPTER 9
STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT
IN FOOD PRODUCTION
9.1 Animal Husbandry
9.2 Plant Breeding
9.3 Single Cell Proteins
9.4 Tissue Culture
With ever -increasing population of the world,
enhancement of food production is a major necessity.
Biological principles as applied to animal husbandry and
plant breeding have a major role in our efforts to increase
food production. Several new techniques like embryo
transfer technology and tissue culture techniques are going
to play a pivotal role in further enhancing food production.
9.1 A NIMAL H USBANDRY
Animal husbandry is the agricultural practice of breeding
and raising livestock. As such it is a vital skill for farmers
and is as much science as it is art. Animal husbandry
deals with the care and breeding of livestock like buffaloes,
cows, pigs, horses, cattle, sheep, camels, goats, etc., that
are useful to humans. Extended, it includes poultry
farming and fisheries. Fisheries include rearing, catching,
selling, etc., of fish, molluscs (shell-fish) and crustaceans
(prawns, crabs, etc.). Since time immemorial, animals like
bees, silk-worm, prawns, crabs, fishes, birds, pigs, cattle,
sheep and camels have been used by humans for products
like milk, eggs, meat, wool, silk, honey, etc.
It is estimated that more then 70 per cent of the world
livestock population is in India and China. However, it isBIOLOGY
surprising to note that the contribution to the world farm produce is only
25 per cent, i.e., the productivity per unit is very low. Hence, in addition
to conventional practices of animal breeding and care, newer technologies
also have to be applied to achieve improvement in quality and productivity.
9.1.1 Management of Farms and Farm Animals
A professional approach to what have been traditional practices of farm
management gives the much needed boost to our food production. Let us
discuss some of the management procedures, employed in various animal
farm systems.
9.1.1.1 Dairy Farm Management
Dairying is the management of animals for milk and its products for
human consumption. Can you list the animals that you would expect
to find in a dairy? What are different kinds of products that can be
made with milk from a dairy farm? In dairy farm management, we deal
with processes and systems that increase yield and improve quality of
milk. Milk yield is primarily dependent on the quality of breeds in the
farm. Selection of good breeds having high yielding potential (under the
climatic conditions of the area), combined with resistance to diseases is
very important. For the yield potential to be realised the cattle have to be
well looked after – they have to be housed well, should have adequate
water and be maintained disease free. The feeding of cattle should be
carried out in a scientific manner – with special emphasis on the quality
and quantity of fodder. Besides, stringent cleanliness and hygiene (both
of the cattle and the handlers) are of paramount importance while milking,
storage and transport of the milk and its products. Nowadays, of course,
much of these processes have become mechanised, which reduces chance
of direct contact of the produce with the handler. Ensuring these stringent
measures would of course, require regular inspections, with proper record
keeping. It would also help to identify and rectify the problems as early
as possible. Regular visits by a veterinary doctor would be mandatory.
You would probably find it interesting if you were to prepare a
questionnaire on diverse aspects of dairy keeping and then follow it up with
a visit to a dairy farm in your locality and seek answers to the questions.
9.1.1.2 Poultry Farm Management
166
Poultry is the class of domesticated fowl (birds) used for food or for their
eggs. They typically include chicken and ducks, and sometimes turkey and
geese. The word poultry is often used to refer to the meat of only these birds,
but in a more general sense it may refer to the meat of other birds too.
As in dairy farming, selection of disease free and suitable breeds,
proper and safe farm conditions, proper feed and water, and hygiene and
health care are important components of poultry farm management.STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION
You may have seen TV news or read newspaper –
reports about the ‘bird flu virus’ which created a scare in
the country and drastically affected egg and chicken
consumption. Find out more about it and discuss whether
the panic reaction was justified. How can we prevent the
spread of the flu in case some chicken are infected?
9.1.2 Animal Breeding
Breeding of animals is an important aspect of animal
husbandry. Animal breeding aims at increasing the yield
of animals and improving the desirable qualities of the
produce. For what kind of characters would we breed
animals? Would the selection of characters differ with
the choice of animals?
What do we understand by the term ‘breed’? A group
of animals related by descent and similar in most characters
like general appearance, features, size, configuration, etc.,
are said to belong to a breed. Find out the names of some
common breeds of cattle and poultry in the farms of your
area.
When breeding is between animals of the same breed it
is called inbreeding, while crosses between different breeds
are called outbreeding.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.1 Improved breed of
cattle and chickens
(a) Jersey (b) Leghorn
Inbreeding : Inbreeding refers to the mating of more
closely related individuals within the same breed for 4-
6 generations. The breeding strategy is as follows – superior males and
superior females of the same breed are identified and mated in pairs.
The progeny obtained from such matings are evaluated and superior
males and females among them are identified for further mating. A
superior female, in the case of cattle, is the cow or buffalo that produces
more milk per lactation. On the other hand, a superior male is the bull,
which gives rise to superior progeny as compared to those of other
males.
Try to recollect the homozygous purelines developed by Mendel as
discussed in Chapter 5. A similar strategy is used for developing purelines
in cattle as was used in case of peas. Inbreeding increases homozygosity.
Thus inbreeding is necessary if we want to evolve a pureline in any animal.
Inbreeding exposes harmful recessive genes that are eliminated by selection.
It also helps in accumulation of superior genes and elimination of less
desirable genes. Therefore, this approach, where there is selection at each
step, increases the productivity of inbred population. However, continued
inbreeding, especially close inbreeding, usually reduces fertility and even
productivity. This is called inbreeding depression. Whenever this becomes
a problem, selected animals of the breeding population should be mated
167BIOLOGY
with unrelated superior animals of the same breed. This usually helps
restore fertility and yield.
Out-breeding : Out-breeding is the breeding of the unrelated animals,
which may be between individuals of the same breed but having no
common ancestors for 4-6 generations (out-crossing) or between
different breeds (cross-breeding) or different species (inter-specific
hybridisation).
Out-crossing: This is the practice of mating of animals within the same
breed, but having no common ancestors on either side of their pedigree
up to 4-6 generations. The offspring of such a mating is known as an
out-cross. It is the best breeding method for animals that are below
average in productivity in milk production, growth rate in beef cattle,
etc. A single outcross often helps to overcome inbreeding depression.
Cross-breeding: In this method, superior males of one breed are mated
with superior females of another breed. Cross-breeding allows the
desirable qualities of two different breeds to be combined. The progeny
hybrid animals may themselves be used for commercial production.
Alternatively, they may be subjected to some form of inbreeding and
selection to develop new stable breeds that may be superior to the existing
breeds. Many new animal breeds have been developed by this approach.
Hisardale is a new breed of sheep developed in Punjab by crossing
Bikaneri ewes and Marino rams.
Interspecific hybridisation: In this method, male and female animals
of two different related species are mated. In some cases, the progeny
may combine desirable features of both the parents, and may be of
considerable economic value, e.g., the mule (Figure 9.2). Do you know
what cross leads to the production of the mule?
168
Controlled breeding experiments are carried out using artificial
insemination. The semen is collected from the male that
is chosen as a parent and injected into the reproductive
tract of the selected female by the breeder. The semen
may be used immediately or can be frozen and used at a
later date. It can also be transported in a frozen form to
where the female is housed. In this way desirable matings
are carried. Artificial insemination helps us overcome
several problems of normal matings. Can you discuss
and list some of them?
Often, the success rate of crossing mature male and
Figure 9.2 Mule
female animals is fairly low even though artificial
insemination is carried out. To improve chances of
successful production of hybrids, other means are also used. Multiple
Ovulation Embryo Transfer Technology (MOET) is one such
programme for herd improvement. In this method, a cow is administered
hormones, with FSH-like activity, to induce follicular maturation and super
ovulation – instead of one egg, which they normally yield per cycle, theySTRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION
produce 6-8 eggs. The animal is either mated with an elite bull or
artificially inseminated. The fertilised eggs at 8–32 cells stages, are
recovered non-surgically and transferred to surrogate mothers. The genetic
mother is available for another round of super ovulation. This technology
has been demonstrated for cattle, sheep, rabbits, buffaloes, mares, etc.
High milk-yielding breeds of females and high quality (lean meat with
less lipid) meat-yielding bulls have been bred successfully to increase
herd size in a short time.
9.1.3 Bee-keeping
Bee-keeping or apiculture is the maintenance of hives of honeybees for
the production of honey. It has been an age-old cottage industry. Honey
is a food of high nutritive value and also finds use in the indigenous
systems of medicine. Honeybee also produces beeswax, which finds many
uses in industry, such as in the preparation of cosmetics and polishes of
various kinds. The increased demand of honey has led to large-scale bee-
keeping practices; it has become an established income generating
industry, whether practiced on a small or on a large scale.
Bee-keeping can be practiced in any area where there are sufficient
bee pastures of some wild shrubs, fruit orchards and cultivated crops.
There are several species of honeybees which can be reared. Of these, the
most common species is Apis indica. Beehives can be kept in one’s
courtyard, on the verandah of the house or even on the roof. Bee-keeping
is not labour-intensive.
Bee-keeping though relatively easy does require some specialised
knowledge and there are several organisations that teach bee-keeping.
The following points are important for successful bee-keeping:
(i) Knowledge of the nature and habits of bees,
(ii) Selection of suitable location for keeping the beehives,
(iii) Catching and hiving of swarms (group of bees),
(iv) Management of beehives during different seasons, and
(v) Handling and collection of honey and of beeswax. Bees are the pollinators
of many of our crop species (see chapter 2) such as sunflower, Brassica,
apple and pear. Keeping beehives in crop fields during flowering period
increases pollination efficiency and improves the yield– beneficial both
from the point of view of crop yield and honey yield.
9.1.4 Fisheries
Fishery is an industry devoted to the catching, processing or selling of fish,
shellfish or other aquatic animals. A large number of our population is
dependent on fish, fish products and other aquatic animals such as prawn,
crab, lobster, edible oyster, etc., for food. Some of the freshwater fishes which
are very common include Catla, Rohu and common carp. Some of the marine
fishes that are eaten include – Hilsa, Sardines, Mackerel and Pomfrets.
Find out what fishes are commonly eaten in your area.
169BIOLOGY
Fisheries has an important place in Indian economy. It provides income
and employment to millions of fishermen and farmers, particularly in the
coastal states. For many, it is the only source of their livelihood. In order
to meet the increasing demands on fisheries, different techniques have
been employed to increase production. For example, through aquaculture
and pisciculture we have been able to increase the production of aquatic
plants and animals, both fresh-water and marine. Find out the difference
between pisciculture and aquaculture. This has led to the development
and flourishing of the fishery industry, and it has brought a lot of income
to the farmers in particular and the country in general. We now talk about
‘Blue Revolution’ as being implemented along the same lines as ‘Green
Revolution’.
9.2 P LANT B REEDING
Traditional farming can only yield a limited biomass, as food for humans
and animals. Better management practices and increase in acreage can
increase yield, but only to a limited extent. Plant breeding as a technology
has helped increase yields to a very large extent. Who in India has not
heard of Green Revolution which was responsible for our country to
not merely meet the national requirements in food production but also
helped us even to export it? Green revolution was dependent to a large
extent on plant breeding techniques for development of high-yielding and
disease resistant varieties in wheat, rice, maize, etc.
9.2.1 What is Plant Breeding?
170
Plant breeding is the purposeful manipulation of plant species in order to
create desired plant types that are better suited for cultivation, give better
yields and are disease resistant. Conventional plant breeding has been
practiced for thousands of years, since the beginning of human civilisation;
recorded evidence of plant breeding dates back to 9,000-11,000 years ago.
Many present-day crops are the result of domestication in ancient times.
Today, all our major food crops are derived from domesticated varieties.
Classical plant breeding involves crossing or hybridisation of pure lines,
followed by artificial selection to produce plants with desirable traits of higher
yield, nutrition and resistance to diseases. With advancements in genetics,
molecular biology and tissue culture, plant breeding is now increasingly
being carried out by using molecular genetic tools.
If we were to list the traits or characters that the breeders have tried to
incorporate into crop plants, the first we would list would be increased
crop yield and improved quality. Increased tolerance to environmental
stresses (salinity, extreme temperatures, drought), resistance to pathogens
(viruses, fungi and bacteria) and increased tolerance to insect pests would
be on our list too.STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION
Plant breeding programmes are carried out in a systematic way
worldwide–in government institutions and commercial companies. The
main steps in breeding a new genetic variety of a crop are –
(i) Collection of variability: Genetic variability is the root of any
breeding programme. In many crops pre-existing genetic variability
is available from wild relatives of the crop. Collection and preservation
of all the different wild varieties, species and relatives of the cultivated
species (followed by their evaluation for their characteristics) is a
pre-requisite for effective exploitation of natural genes available in
the populations. The entire collection (of plants/seeds) having all
the diverse alleles for all genes in a given crop is called germplasm
collection.
(ii) Evaluation and selection of parents: The germplasm is evaluated
so as to identify plants with desirable combination of characters.
The selected plants are multiplied and used in the process of
hybridisation. Purelines are created wherever desirable and possible.
(iii) Cross hybridisation among the selected parents: The desired
characters have very often to be combined from two different plants
(parents), for example high protein quality of one parent may need
to be combined with disease resistance from another parent. This is
possible by cross hybridising the two parents to produce hybrids
that genetically combine the desired characters in one plant. This is
a very time-consuming and tedious process since the pollen
grains from the desirable plant chosen as male parent have to be
collected and placed on the stigma of the flowers selected as female
parent (In chapter 2 details on how to make crosses have been
described). Also, it is not necessary that the hybrids do combine the
desirable characters; usually only one in few hundred to a thousand
crosses shows the desirable combination.
(iv) Selection and testing of superior recombinants : This step
consists of selecting, among the progeny of the hybrids, those plants
that have the desired character combination. The selection process is
crucial to the success of the breeding objective and requires careful
scientific evaluation of the progeny. This step yields plants that are
superior to both of the parents (very often more than one superior
progeny plant may become available). These are self-pollinated for
several generations till they reach a state of uniformity (homozygosity),
so that the characters will not segregate in the progeny.
(v) Testing, release and commercialisation of new cultivars: The
newly selected lines are evaluated for their yield and other agronomic
traits of quality, disease resistance, etc. This evaluation is done by
growing these in the research fields and recording their performance
under ideal fertiliser application, irrigation, and other crop
management practices. The evaluation in research fields is followed
171BIOLOGY
by testing the materials in farmers’ fields, for at least three growing
seasons at several locations in the country, representing all the
agroclimatic zones where the crop is usually grown. The material is
evaluated in comparison to the best available local crop cultivar – a
check or reference cultivar.
India is mainly an agricultural country. Agriculture accounts
for approximately 33 per cent of India’s GDP and employs nearly
62 per cent of the population. After India’s independence, one of the main
challenges facing the country was that of producing enough food for the
increasing population. As only limited land is fit for cultivation, India has
to strive to increase yields per unit area from existing farm land. The
development of several high yielding varieties of wheat and rice in the
mid-1960s, as a result of various plant breeding techniques led to dramatic
increase in food production in our country. This phase is often referred
to as the Green Revolution. Figure 9.3 represents some Indian hybrid
crops of high yeilding varieties.
(a)
(b)
172
(c)
Figure 9.3 Some Indian hybrid crops: (a) Maize; (b) Wheat; (c) Garden peasSTRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION
Wheat and Rice: During the period 1960 to 2000, wheat production
increased from 11 million tonnes to 75 million tonnes while rice production
went up from 35 million tonnes to 89.5 million tonnes. This was due to the
development of semi-dwarf varieties of wheat and rice. Nobel laureate
Norman E. Borlaug, at International Centre for Wheat and Maize
Improvement in Mexico, developed semi-dwarf wheat. In 1963, several
varieties such as Sonalika and Kalyan Sona, which were high yielding and
disease resistant, were introduced all over the wheat-growing belt of India.
Semi-dwarf rice varieties were derived from IR-8, (developed at International
Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Philippines) and Taichung Native-1 (from
Taiwan). The derivatives were introduced in 1966. Later better-yielding semi-
dwarf varieties Jaya and Ratna were developed in India.
Sugar cane: Saccharum barberi was originally grown in north India, but
had poor sugar content and yield. Tropical canes grown in south India
Saccharum officinarum had thicker stems and higher sugar content but
did not grow well in north India. These two species were successfully
crossed to get sugar cane varieties combining the desirable qualities of
high yield, thick stems, high sugar and ability to grow in the sugar cane
areas of north India.
Millets: Hybrid maize, jowar and bajra have been successfully developed
in India. Hybrid breeding have led to the development of several high
yielding varieties resistant to water stress.
9.2.2 Plant Breeding for Disease Resistance
A wide range of fungal, bacterial and viral pathogens, affect the yield of
cultivated crop species, especially in tropical climates. Crop losses can
often be significant, up to 20-30 per cent, or sometimes even total. In this
situation, breeding and development of cultivars resistant to disease
enhances food production. This also helps reduce the dependence on
use of fungicides and bacteriocides. Resistance of the host plant is the
ability to prevent the pathogen from causing disease and is determined
by the genetic constitution of the host plant. Before breeding is
undertaken, it is important to know about the causative organism and
the mode of transmission. Some of the diseases caused by fungi are rusts,
e.g., brown rust of wheat, red rot of sugarcane and late blight of potato;
by bacteria – black rot of crucifers; and by viruses – tobacco mosaic,
turnip mosaic, etc.
Methods of breeding for disease resistance: Breeding is carried
out by the conventional breeding techniques (described earlier) or by
mutation breeding. The conventional method of breeding for disease
resistance is that of hybridisation and selection. It’s steps are essentially
identical to those for breeding for any other agronomic characters such
as high yield. The various sequential steps are : screening germplasm
173BIOLOGY
for resistance sources, hybridisation of selected parents, selection and
evaluation of the hybrids and testing and release of new varieties.
Some crop varieties bred by hybridisation and selection, for
disease resistance to fungi, bacteria and viral diseases are released
(Table 9.1).
Table 9.1
174
Crop Variety Resistance to diseases
Wheat Himgiri Leaf and stripe rust, hill bunt
Brassica Pusa swarnim
(Karan rai) White rust
Cauliflower Pusa Shubhra,
Pusa Snowball K-1 Black rot and Curl
blight black rot
Cowpea Pusa Komal Bacterial blight
Chilli Pusa Sadabahar Chilly mosaic virus,
Tobacco mosaic virus
and Leaf curl
Conventional breeding is often constrained by the availability of limited
number of disease resistance genes that are present and identified in various
crop varieties or wild relatives. Inducing mutations in plants through diverse
means and then screening the plant materials for resistance sometimes
leads to desirable genes being identified. Plants having these desirable
characters can then be either multiplied directly or can be used in breeding.
Other breeding methods that are used are selection amongst somaclonal
variants and genetic engineering.
Mutation is the process by which genetic variations are created
through changes in the base sequence within genes (see Chapter 5)
resulting in the creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental
type. It is possible to induce mutations artificially through use of chemicals
or radiations (like gamma radiations), and selecting and using the plants
that have the desirable character as a source in breeding – this process is
called mutation breeding. In mung bean, resistance to yellow mosaic
virus and powdery mildew were induced by mutations.
Several wild relatives of different cultivated species of plants have been
shown to have certain resistant characters but have very low yield. Hence,
there is a need to introduce the resistant genes into the high-yielding
cultivated varieties. Resistance to yellow mosaic virus in bhindi
(Abelmoschus esculentus) was transferred from a wild species and
resulted in a new variety of A. esculentus called Parbhani kranti.STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION
All the above examples involve sources of resistance genes that are in
the same crop species, which has to be bred for disease resistance, or in a
related wild species. Transfer of resistance genes is achieved by sexual
hybridisation between the target and the source plant followed by
selection.
9.2.3 Plant Breeding for Developing Resistance
to Insect Pests
Another major cause for large scale destruction of crop plant and crop
produce is insect and pest infestation. Insect resistance in host crop plants
may be due to morphological, biochemical or physiological characteristics.
Hairy leaves in several plants are associated with resistance to insect pests,
e.g, resistance to jassids in cotton and cereal leaf beetle in wheat. In wheat,
solid stems lead to non-preference by the stem sawfly and smooth leaved
and nectar-less cotton varieties do not attract bollworms. High aspartic
acid, low nitrogen and sugar content in maize leads to resistance to maize
stem borers.
Breeding methods for insect pest resistance involve the same steps as
those for any other agronomic trait such as yield or quality and are as
discussed earlier. Sources of resistance genes may be cultivated varieties,
germplasm collections of the crop or wild relatives.
Some released crop varieties bred by hybridisation and selection, for
insect pest resistance are given in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2
Crop Variety Insect Pests
Brassica
(rapeseed mustard) Pusa Gaurav Aphids
Flat bean Pusa Sem 2,
Pusa Sem 3 Jassids, aphids and
fruit borer
Okra (Bhindi) Pusa Sawani
Pusa A-4 Shoot and Fruit borer
9.2.4 Plant Breeding for Improved Food Quality
More than 840 million people in the world do not have adequate food to
meet their daily food and nutritional requirements. A far greater number –
three billion people – suffer from micronutrient, protein and vitamin
deficiencies or ‘hidden hunger’ because they cannot afford to buy enough
fruits, vegetables, legumes, fish and meat. Diets lacking essential
micronutrients – particularly iron, vitamin A, iodine and zinc – increase
the risk for disease, reduce lifespan and reduce mental abilities.
175BIOLOGY
Biofortification – breeding crops with higher levels of vitamins and
minerals, or higher protein and healthier fats – is the most practical
means to improve public health.
Breeding for improved nutritional quality is undertaken with the
objectives of improving –
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Protein content and quality;
Oil content and quality;
Vitamin content; and
Micronutrient and mineral content.
In 2000, maize hybrids that had twice the amount of the amino acids,
lysine and tryptophan, compared to existing maize hybrids were
developed. Wheat variety, Atlas 66, having a high protein content, has
been used as a donor for improving cultivated wheat. It has been possible
to develop an iron-fortified rice variety containing over five times as much
iron as in commonly consumed varieties.
The Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi has also released
several vegetable crops that are rich in vitamins and minerals, e.g., vitamin
A enriched carrots, spinach, pumpkin; vitamin C enriched bitter gourd,
bathua, mustard, tomato; iron and calcium enriched spinach and bathua;
and protein enriched beans – broad, lablab, French and garden peas.
9.3 S INGLE C ELL P ROTEIN (SCP)
176
Conventional agricultural production of cereals, pulses, vegetables, fruits,
etc., may not be able to meet the demand of food at the rate at which
human and animal population is increasing. The shift from grain to meat
diets also creates more demand for cereals as it takes 3-10 Kg of grain to
produce 1 Kg of meat by animal farming. Can you explain this statement
in the light of your knowledge of food chains? More than 25 per cent of
human population is suffering from hunger and malnutrition. One of the
alternate sources of proteins for animal and human nutrition is Single
Cell Protein (SCP).
Microbes are being grown on an industrial scale as source of good
protein. Microbes like Spirulina can be grown easily on materials like
waste water from potato processing plants (containing starch), straw,
molasses, animal manure and even sewage, to produce large quantities
and can serve as food rich in protein, minerals, fats, carbohydrate and
vitamins. Incidentally such utilisation also reduces environmental
pollution.
It has been calculated that a 250 Kg cow produces 200 g of protein
per day. In the same period, 250g of a micro-organism like Methylophilus
methylotrophus, because of its high rate of biomass production and
growth, can be expected to produce 25 tonnes of protein. The fact thatSTRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION
mushrooms are eaten by many people and large scale mushroom culture
is a growing industry makes it believable that microbes too would
become acceptable as food.
9.4 T ISSUE C ULTURE
As traditional breeding techniques failed to keep pace with demand and
to provide sufficiently fast and efficient systems for crop improvement,
another technology called tissue culture got developed. What does
tissue culture mean? It was learnt by scientists, during 1950s, that
whole plants could be regenerated from explants, i.e., any part of a
plant taken out and grown in a test tube, under sterile conditions in
special nutrient media. This capacity to generate a whole plant from
any cell/explant is called totipotency. You will learn how to accomplish
this in higher classes. It is important to stress here that the nutrient
medium must provide a carbon source such as sucrose and also
inorganic salts, vitamins, amino acids and growth regulators like auxins,
cytokinins etc. By application of these methods it is possible to achieve
propagation of a large number of plants in very short durations. This
method of producing thousands of plants through tissue culture is
called micro-propagation. Each of these plants will be genetically
identical to the original plant from which they were grown, i.e., they are
somaclones. Many important food plants like tomato, banana, apple,
etc., have been produced on commercial scale using this method. Try
to visit a tissue culture laboratory with your teacher to better understand
and appreciate the process.
Another important application of the method is the recovery of healthy
plants from diseased plants. Although the plant is infected with a virus,
the meristem (apical and axillary) is free of virus. Hence, one can remove
the meristem and grow it in vitro to obtain virus-free plants. Scientists
have succeeded in culturing meristems of banana, sugarcane, potato, etc.
Scientists have even isolated single cells from plants and after
digesting their cell walls have been able to isolate naked protoplasts
(surrounded by plasma membranes). Isolated protoplasts from two
different varieties of plants – each having a desirable character – can be
fused to get hybrid protoplasts, which can be further grown to form a
new plant. These hybrids are called somatic hybrids while the process
is called somatic hybridisation. Imagine a situation when a protoplast
of tomato is fused with that of potato, and then they are grown – to form
new hybrid plants combining tomato and potato characteristics. Well,
this has been achieved – resulting in formation of pomato; unfortunately
this plant did not have all the desired combination of characteristics
for its commercial utilisation.
177BIOLOGY
SUMMARY
Animal husbandry is the practice of taking care and breeding domestic
animals by applying scientific principles. The ever-increasing demand
of food from animals and animal products both in terms of quality and
quantity has been met by good animal husbandry practices. These
practices include (i) management of farm and farm animals, and (ii)
animal breeding. In view of the high nutritive value of honey and its
medicinal importance, there has been a remarkable growth in the practice
of bee-keeping or apiculture. Fishery is another flourishing industry
meeting the ever-increasing demand for fish, fish products and other
aquatic foods.
Plant breeding may be used to create varieties, which are resistant
to pathogens and to insect pests. This increases the yield of the food.
This method has also been used to increase the protein content of the
plant foods and thereby enhance the quality of food. In India, several
varieties of different crop plants have been produced. All these measures
enhance the production of food. Techniques of tissue culture and
somatic hybridisation offer vast potential for manipulation of plants in
vitro to produce new varieties.
EXERCISES
1.
2.
178
Explain in brief the role of animal husbandry in human welfare.
If your family owned a dairy farm, what measures would you undertake
to improve the quality and quantity of milk production?
3. What is meant by the term ‘breed’? What are the objectives of animal
breeding?
4. Name the methods employed in animal breeding. According to you which
of the methods is best? Why?
5. What is apiculture? How is it important in our lives?
6. Discuss the role of fishery in enhancement of food production.
7. Briefly describe various steps involved in plant breeding.
8. Explain what is meant by biofortification.
9. Which part of the plant is best suited for making virus-free plants and
why?
10. What is the major advantage of producing plants by micropropagation?
11. Find out what the various components of the medium used for
propagation of an explant in vitro are?
12. Name any five hybrid varieties of crop plants which have been developed
in India.
CHAPTER 10
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
10.1 Microbes in Household
Products
10.2 Microbes in Industrial
Products
10.3 Microbes in Sewage
Treatment
10.4 Microbes in Production of
Biogas
10.5 Microbes as Biocontrol
Agents
10.6 Microbes as Biofertilisers
Besides macroscopic plants and animals, microbes are
the major components of biological systems on this earth.
You have studied about the diversity of living organisms
in Class XI. Do you remember which Kingdoms among
the living organisms contain micro-organisms? Which are
the ones that are only microscopic? Microbes are present
everywhere – in soil, water, air, inside our bodies and that
of other animals and plants. They are present even at sites
where no other life-form could possibly exist– sites such
as deep inside the geysers (thermal vents) where the
temperature may be as high as 100 0 C, deep in the soil,
under the layers of snow several metres thick, and in highly
acidic environments. Microbes are diverse– protozoa,
bacteria, fungi and microscopic plant viruses, viroids and
also prions that are proteinacious infectious agents. Some
of the microbes are shown in Figures 10.1 and 10.2.
Microbes like bacteria and many fungi can be grown
on nutritive media to form colonies (Figure 10.3), that can
be seen with the naked eyes. Such cultures are useful in
studies on micro-organisms.BIOLOGY
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(c)
Figure10.1 Bacteria: (a) Rod-shaped,
magnified 1500X ; (b) Spherical
shaped, magnified1500X; (c) A rod-
shaped bacterium showing flagella,
magnified 50,000X
Figure 10.2
Viruses: (a) A bacteriophage; (b)
Adenovirus which causes respiratory
infections; (c) Rod-shaped Tobacco
Mosaic Virus (TMV). Magnified about
1,00,000–1,50,000X
180
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.3 (a) Colonies of bacteria growing in a petri dish;
(b) Fungal colony growing in a petri dishMICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
In chapter 8, you have read that microbes cause a large number of
diseases in human beings. They also cause diseases in animals and plants.
But this should not make you think that all microbes are harmful; several
microbes are useful to man in diverse ways. Some of the most important
contributions of microbes to human welfare are discussed in this chapter.
10.1 M ICROBES
IN
H OUSEHOLD P RODUCTS
You would be surprised to know that we use microbes or products
derived from them everyday. A common example is the production of
curd from milk. Micro-organisms such as Lactobacillus and others
commonly called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) grow in milk and convert it
to curd. During growth, the LAB produce acids that coagulate and
partially digest the milk proteins. A small amount of curd added to the
fresh milk as inoculum or starter contain millions of LAB, which at
suitable temperatures multiply, thus converting milk to curd, which
also improves its nutritional quality by increasing vitamin B 12 . In our
stomach too, the LAB play very beneficial role in checking disease-
causing microbes.
The dough, which is used for making foods such as dosa and idli is
also fermented by bacteria. The puffed-up appearance of dough is due to
the production of CO 2 gas. Can you tell which metabolic pathway is
taking place resulting in the formation of CO 2 ? Where do you think the
bacteria for these fermentations came from? Similarly the dough, which
is used for making bread, is fermented using baker’s yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae). A number of traditional drinks and foods
are also made by fermentation by the microbes. ‘Toddy’, a traditional
drink of some parts of southern India is made by fermenting sap from
palms. Microbes are also used to ferment fish, soyabean and bamboo-
shoots to make foods. Cheese, is one of the oldest food items in which
microbes were used. Different varieties of cheese are known by their
characteristic texture, flavour and taste, the specificity coming from the
microbes used. For example, the large holes in ‘Swiss cheese’ are due to
production of a large amount of CO 2 by a bacterium named
Propionibacterium sharmanii. The ‘Roquefort cheese’ are ripened by
growing a specific fungi on them, which gives them a particular flavour.
10.2 M ICROBES
IN
I NDUSTRIAL P RODUCTS
Even in industry, microbes are used to synthesise a number of products
valuable to human beings. Beverages and antibiotics are some examples.
Production on an industrial scale, requires growing microbes in very large
vessels called fermentors (Figure 10.4).
181BIOLOGY
10.2.1 Fermented Beverages
Figure 10.4 Fermentors
Microbes especially yeasts have been used from
time immemorial for the production of beverages
like wine, beer, whisky, brandy or rum. For this
purpose the same yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae used for bread-making and
commonly called brewer’s yeast, is used for
fermenting malted cereals and fruit juices, to
produce ethanol. Do you recollect the metabolic
reactions, which result in the production of
ethanol by yeast? Depending on the type of the
raw material used for fermentation and the type
of processing (with or without distillation)
different types of alcoholic drinks are obtained.
Wine and beer are produced without distillation
whereas whisky, brandy and rum are produced
by distillation of the fermented broth. The
photograph of a fermentation plant is shown in
Figure 10.5.
10.2.2 Antibiotics
Antibiotics produced by microbes are regarded
as one of the most significant discoveries of the
twentieth century and have greatly contributed
towards the welfare of the human society. Anti is
a Greek word that means ‘against’, and bio means
Figure 10.5 Fermentation Plant
‘life’, together they mean ‘against life’ (in the
context of disease causing organisms); whereas with reference to human
beings, they are ‘pro life’ and not against. Antibiotics are chemical
substances, which are produced by some microbes and can kill or retard
the growth of other (disease-causing) microbes.
You are familiar with the commonly used antibiotic Penicillin. Do you
know that Penicillin was the first antibiotic to be discovered, and it was a
chance discovery? Alexander Fleming while working on Staphylococci
bacteria, once observed a mould growing in one of his unwashed culture
plates around which Staphylococci could not grow. He found out that it
was due to a chemical produced by the mould and he named it Penicillin
182
after the mould Penicillium notatum. However, its full potential as an
effective antibiotic was established much later by Ernest Chain and
Howard Florey. This antibiotic was extensively used to treat American
soldiers wounded in World War II. Fleming, Chain and Florey were awarded
the Nobel Prize in 1945, for this discovery.MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
After Penicillin, other antibiotics were also purified from other
microbes. Can you name some other antibiotics and find out their
sources? Antibiotics have greatly improved our capacity to treat deadly
diseases such as plague, whooping cough (kali khansi ), diphtheria (gal
ghotu) and leprosy (kusht rog), which used to kill millions all over the
globe. Today, we cannot imagine a world without antibiotics.
10.2.3 Chemicals, Enzymes and other Bioactive Molecules
Microbes are also used for commercial and industrial production of
certain chemicals like organic acids, alcohols and enzymes. Examples of
acid producers are Aspergillus niger (a fungus) of citric acid, Acetobacter
aceti (a bacterium) of acetic acid; Clostridium butylicum (a bacterium) of
butyric acid and Lactobacillus (a bacterium) of lactic acid.
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is used for commercial production
of ethanol. Microbes are also used for production of enzymes. Lipases are
used in detergent formulations and are helpful in removing oily stains
from the laundry. You must have noticed that bottled fruit juices bought
from the market are clearer as compared to those made at home. This is
because the bottled juices are clarified by the use of pectinases and
proteases. Streptokinase produced by the bacterium Streptococcus and
modified by genetic engineering is used as a ‘clot buster’ for removing
clots from the blood vessels of patients who have undergone myocardial
infaction leading to heart attack.
Another bioactive molecule, cyclosporin A, that is used as an
immunosuppressive agent in organ-transplant patients, is produced by
the fungus Trichoderma polysporum. Statins produced by the yeast
Monascus purpureus have been commercialised as blood-cholesterol
lowering agents. It acts by competitively inhibiting the enzyme responsible
for synthesis of cholesterol.
10.3 M ICROBES IN S EWAGE T REATMENT
We know that large quantities of waste water are generated everyday in
cities and towns. A major component of this waste water is human excreta.
This municipal waste-water is also called sewage. It contains large
amounts of organic matter and microbes. Many of which are pathogenic.
Have you ever wondered where this huge quantity of sewage or urban
waste water is disposed off daily? This cannot be discharged into natural
water bodies like rivers and streams directly – you can understand why.
Before disposal, hence, sewage is treated in sewage treatment plants (STPs)
to make it less polluting. Treatment of waste water is done by the
183BIOLOGY
heterotrophic microbes naturally present in
the sewage. This treatment is carried out in
two stages:
184
Primary treatment : These treatment
steps basically involve physical removal of
particles – large and small – from the sewage
through filtration and sedimentation. These
are removed in stages; initially, floating debris
is removed by sequential filtration. Then the
grit (soil and small pebbles) are removed by
sedimentation. All solids that settle form the
primary sludge, and the supernatant forms
the effluent. The effluent from the primary
Figure 10.6 Secondary treatment
settling tank is taken for secondary treatment.
Secondary treatment or Biological treatment : The primary
effluent is passed into large aeration tanks (Figure 10.6) where it is
constantly agitated mechanically and air is pumped into it. This allows
vigorous growth of useful aerobic microbes into flocs (masses of
bacteria associated with fungal filaments to form mesh like
structures). While growing, these microbes consume the major part
of the organic matter in the effluent. This significantly reduces the
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) of the effluent. BOD refers to
the amount of the oxygen that would be consumed if all the organic
matter in one liter of water were oxidised by bacteria. The sewage
water is treated till the BOD is reduced. The BOD test measures the
rate of uptake of oxygen by micro-organisms in a sample of water
and thus, indirectly, BOD is a measure of the organic matter present
in the water. The greater the BOD of waste water, more is its polluting
potential.
Once the BOD of sewage or waste water is reduced significantly, the
effluent is then passed into a settling tank where the bacterial ‘flocs’ are
allowed to sediment. This sediment is called activated sludge. A small
part of the activated sludge is pumped back into the aeration tank to
serve as the inoculum. The remaining major part of the sludge is pumped
into large tanks called anaerobic sludge digesters. Here, other kinds
of bacteria, which grow anaerobically, digest the bacteria and the fungi
in the sludge. During this digestion, bacteria produce a mixture of gases
such as methane, hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide. These gases
form biogas and can be used as source of energy as it is inflammable.
The effluent from the secondary treatment plant is generally released
into natural water bodies like rivers and streams. An aerial view of such
a plant is shown in Figure 10.7.MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
You can appreciate how microbes play a major
role in treating millions of gallons of waste water
everyday across the globe. This methodology has
been practiced for more than a century now, in
almost all parts of the world. Till date, no man-
made technology has been able to rival the
microbial treatment of sewage.
You are aware that due to increasing
urbanisation, sewage is being produced in much
larger quantities than ever before. However the
Figure 10.7 An aerial view of a sewage plant
number of sewage treatment plants has not
increased enough to treat such large quantities.
So the untreated sewage is often discharged directly into rivers leading to
their pollution and increase in water-borne diseases.
The Ministry of Environment and Forests has initiated Ganga Action
Plan and Yamuna Action Plan to save these major rivers of our country
from pollution. Under these plans, it is proposed to build a large number
of sewage treatment plants so that only treated sewage may be discharged
in the rivers. A visit to a sewage treatment plant situated in any place
near you would be a very interesting and educating experience.
10.4 M ICROBES
IN
P RODUCTION
OF
B IOGAS
Biogas is a mixture of gases (containing predominantly methane) produced
by the microbial activity and which may be used as fuel. You have learnt
that microbes produce different types of gaseous end-products during
growth and metabolism. The type of the gas produced depends upon the
microbes and the organic substrates they utilise. In the examples cited in
relation to fermentation of dough, cheese making and production of
beverages, the main gas produced was CO 2. . However, certain bacteria,
which grow anaerobically on cellulosic material, produce large amount
of methane along with CO 2 and H 2 . These bacteria are collectively called
methanogens, and one such common bacterium is Methanobacterium.
These bacteria are commonly found in the anaerobic sludge during
sewage treatment. These bacteria are also present in the rumen (a part of
stomach) of cattle. A lot of cellulosic material present in the food of cattle
is also present in the rumen. In rumen, these bacteria help in the
breakdown of cellulose and play an important role in the nutrition of
cattle. Do you think we, human beings, are able to digest the celluose
present in our foods? Thus, the excreta (dung) of cattle, commonly called
gobar, is rich in these bacteria. Dung can be used for generation of biogas,
commonly called gobar gas.
The biogas plant consists of a concrete tank (10-15 feet deep) in which
bio-wastes are collected and a slurry of dung is fed. A floating cover is
185BIOLOGY
placed over the slurry, which
keeps on rising as the gas is
produced in the tank due to the
microbial activity. The biogas
plant has an outlet, which is
connected to a pipe to supply
biogas to nearby houses. The
spent slurry is removed through
another outlet and may be used
as fertiliser. Cattle dung is
available in large quantities in
rural areas where cattle are used
for a variety of purposes. So
biogas plants are more often
built in rural areas. The biogas
thus produced is used for
cooking and lighting. The
picture of a biogas plant is
shown in Figure 10.8. The
Figure 10.8 A typical biogas plant
technology of biogas production
was developed in India mainly
due to the efforts of Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) and
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC). If your school is situated
in a village or near a village, it would be very interesting to enquire if there
are any biogas plants nearby. Visit the biogas plant and learn more about
it from the people who are actually managing it.
10.5 M ICROBES
186
AS
B IOCONTROL A GENTS
Biocontrol refers to the use of biological methods for controlling plant
diseases and pests. In modern society, these problems have been tackled
increasingly by the use of chemicals – by use of insecticides and pesticides.
These chemicals are toxic and extremely harmful, to human beings and
animals alike, and have been polluting our environment (soil, ground
water), fruits, vegetables and crop plants. Our soil is also polluted through
our use of weedicides to remove weeds.
Biological control of pests and diseases: In agriculture, there is a
method of controlling pests that relies on natural predation rather than
introduced chemicals. A key belief of the organic farmer is that biodiversity
furthers health. The more variety a landscape has, the more sustainable
it is. The organic farmer, therefore, works to create a system where the
insects that are sometimes called pests are not eradicated, but instead
are kept at manageable levels by a complex system of checks and balances
within a living and vibrant ecosystem. Contrary to the ‘conventional’
farming practices which often use chemical methods to kill both usefulMICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
and harmful life forms indiscriminately, this is a holistic approach that
seeks to develop an understanding of the webs of interaction between the
myriad of organisms that constitute the field fauna and flora. The organic
farmer holds the view that the eradication of the creatures that are often
described as pests is not only possible, but also undesirable, for without
them the beneficial predatory and parasitic insects which depend upon
them as food or hosts would not be able to survive. Thus, the use of
biocontrol measures will greatly reduce our dependence on toxic chemicals
and pesticides. An important part of the biological farming approach is
to become familiar with the various life forms that inhabit the field,
predators as well as pests, and also their life cycles, patterns of feeding
and the habitats that they prefer. This will help develop appropriate means
of biocontrol.
The very familiar beetle with red and black markings – the Ladybird,
and Dragonflies are useful to get rid of aphids and mosquitoes,
respectively. An example of microbial biocontrol agents that can be
introduced in order to control butterfly caterpillars is the bacteria Bacillus
thuringiensis (often written as Bt ). These are available in sachets as dried
spores which are mixed with water and sprayed onto vulnerable plants
such as brassicas and fruit trees, where these are eaten by the insect
larvae. In the gut of the larvae, the toxin is released and the larvae get
killed. The bacterial disease will kill the caterpillars, but leave other insects
unharmed. Because of the development of methods of genetic engineering
in the last decade or so, the scientists have introduced B. thuringiensis
toxin genes into plants. Such plants are resistant to attack by insect pests.
Bt-cotton is one such example, which is being cultivated in some states
of our country. You will learn more about this in chapter 12.
A biological control being developed for use in the treatment of plant
disease is the fungus Trichoderma. Trichoderma species are free-living
fungi that are very common in the root ecosystems. They are effective
biocontrol agents of several plant pathogens.
Baculoviruses are pathogens that attack insects and other arthropods.
The majority of baculoviruses used as biological control agents are in the
genus Nucleopolyhedrovirus. These viruses are excellent candidates for
species-specific, narrow spectrum insecticidal applications. They have
been shown to have no negative impacts on plants, mammals, birds, fish
or even on non-target insects. This is especially desirable when beneficial
insects are being conserved to aid in an overall integrated pest
management (IPM) programme, or when an ecologically sensitive area is
being treated.
10.6 M ICROBES
AS
B IOFERTILISERS
With our present day life styles environmental pollution is a major cause
of concern. The use of the chemical fertilisers to meet the ever-increasing
187BIOLOGY
demand of agricultural produce has contributed significantly to
this pollution. Of course, we have now realised that there are problems
associated with the overuse of chemical fertilisers and there is a
large pressure to switch to organic farming – the use of biofertilisers.
Biofertilisers are organisms that enrich the nutrient quality of the soil.
The main sources of biofertilisers are bacteria, fungi and cyanobacteria.
You have studied about the nodules on the roots of leguminous plants
formed by the symbiotic association of Rhizobium. These bacteria fix
atmospheric nitrogen into organic forms, which is used by the plant as
nutrient. Other bacteria can fix atmospheric nitrogen while free-living in
the soil (examples Azospirillum and Azotobacter), thus enriching the
nitrogen content of the soil.
Fungi are also known to form symbiotic associations with plants
(mycorrhiza). Many members of the genus Glomus form mycorrhiza.
The fungal symbiont in these associations absorbs phosphorus from
soil and passes it to the plant. Plants having such associations show
other benefits also, such as resistance to root-borne pathogens, tolerance
to salinity and drought, and an overall increase in plant growth and
development. Can you tell what advantage the fungus derives from
this association?
Cyanobacteria are autotrophic microbes widely distributed in aquatic
and terrestrial environments many of which can fix atmospheric nitrogen,
e.g. Anabaena, Nostoc, Oscillatoria, etc. In paddy fields, cyanobacteria
serve as an important biofertiliser. Blue green algae also add organic matter
to the soil and increase its fertility. Currently, in our country, a number
of biofertilisers are available commercially in the market and farmers use
these regularly in their fields to replenish soil nutrients and to reduce
dependence on chemical fertilisers.
SUMMARY
188
Microbes are a very important component of life on earth. Not all
microbes are pathogenic. Many microbes are very useful to human
beings. We use microbes and microbially derived products almost every
day. Bacteria called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) grow in milk to convert it
into curd. The dough, which is used to make bread, is fermented by
yeast called Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Certain dishes such as idli and
dosa, are made from dough fermented by microbes. Bacteria and fungi
are used to impart particular texture, taste and flavor to cheese. Microbes
are used to produce industrial products like lactic acid, acetic acid
and alcohol, which are used in a variety of processes in the industry.
Antibiotics like penicillins produced by useful microbes are used to kill
disease-causing harmful microbes. Antibiotics have played a major role
in controlling infectious diseases like diphtheria, whooping cough andMICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
pneumonia. For more than a hundred years, microbes are being used
to treat sewage (waste water) by the process of activated sludge formation
and this helps in recycling of water in nature. Methanogens produce
methane (biogas) while degrading plant waste. Biogas produced by
microbes is used as a source of energy in rural areas. Microbes can also
be used to kill harmful pests, a process called as biocontrol. The
biocontrol measures help us to avoid heavy use of toxic pesticides for
controlling pests. There is a need these days to push for use of
biofertilisers in place of chemical fertilisers. It is clear from the diverse
uses human beings have put microbes to that they play an important
role in the welfare of human society.
EXERCISES
1. Bacteria cannot be seen with the naked eyes, but these can be seen
with the help of a microscope. If you have to carry a sample from your
home to your biology laboratory to demonstrate the presence of microbes
under a microscope, which sample would you carry and why?
2. Give examples to prove that microbes release gases during metabolism.
3. In which food would you find lactic acid bacteria? Mention some of
their useful applications.
4. Name some traditional Indian foods made of wheat, rice and Bengal
gram (or their products) which involve use of microbes.
5. In which way have microbes played a major role in controlling diseases
caused by harmful bacteria?
6. Name any two species of fungus, which are used in the production of
the antibiotics.
7. What is sewage? In which way can sewage be harmful to us?
8. What is the key difference between primary and secondary sewage
treatment?
9. Do you think microbes can also be used as source of energy? If yes, how?
10. Microbes can be used to decrease the use of chemical fertilisers and
pesticides. Explain how this can be accomplished.
11. Three water samples namely river water, untreated sewage water and
secondary effluent discharged from a sewage treatment plant were
subjected to BOD test. The samples were labelled A, B and C; but the
laboratory attendant did not note which was which. The BOD values
of the three samples A, B and C were recorded as 20mg/L, 8mg/L and
400mg/L, respectively. Which sample of the water is most polluted?
Can you assign the correct label to each assuming the river water is
relatively clean?
189BIOLOGY
12. Find out the name of the microbes from which Cyclosporin A (an
immunosuppressive drug) and Statins (blood cholesterol lowering
agents) are obtained.
13. Find out the role of microbes in the following and discuss it with your teacher.
(a) Single cell protein (SCP)
(b) Soil
14. Arrange the following in the decreasing order (most important first) of
their importance, for the welfare of human society. Give reasons for
your answer.
Biogas, Citric acid, Penicillin and Curd
15. How do biofertilisers enrich the fertility of the soil?
190
Chapter 11
Biotechnology : Principles and
Processes
Chapter 12
Biotechnology and Its
Applications
Ever since the days of Rene Descartes, the French philosopher,
mathematician and biologist of seventeenth century, all human
knowledge especially natural sciences were directed to develop
technologies which add to the creature comforts of human
lives, as also value to human life. The whole approach to
understanding natural phenomena became anthropocentric.
Physics and chemistry gave rise to engineering, technologies
and industries which all worked for human comfort and welfare.
The major utility of the biological world is as a source of food.
Biotechnology, the twentieth century off-shoot of modern
biology, changed our daily life as its products brought
qualitative improvement in health and food production. The
basic principles underlying biotechnological processes and some
applications are highlighted and discussed in this unit.H ERBERT B OYER
(1936 )
Herbert Boyer was born in 1936 and brought up in a corner of western
Pennsylvania where railroads and mines were the destiny of most young
men. He completed graduate work at the University of Pittsburgh, in
1963, followed by three years of post-graduate studies at Yale.
In 1966, Boyer took over assistant professorship at the University of
California at San Francisco. By 1969, he performed studies on a couple
of restriction enzymes of the E. coli bacterium with especially useful
properties. Boyer observed that these enzymes have the capability of
cutting DNA strands in a particular fashion, which left what has became
known as ‘sticky ends’ on the strands. These clipped ends made pasting
together pieces of DNA a precise exercise.
This discovery, in turn, led to a rich and rewarding conversation in
Hawaii with a Stanford scientist named Stanley Cohen. Cohen had
been studying small ringlets of DNA called plasmids and which float
about freely in the cytoplasm of certain bacterial cells and replicate
independently from the coding strand of DNA. Cohen had developed
a method of removing these plasmids from the cell and then reinserting
them in other cells. Combining this process with that of DNA splicing
enabled Boyer and Cohen to recombine segments of DNA in desired
configurations and insert the DNA in bacterial cells, which could then
act as manufacturing plants for specific proteins. This breakthrough was
the basis upon which the discipline of biotechnology was founded.CHAPTER 11
BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES
AND PROCESSES
11.1 Principles of Biotechnology
11.2 Tools of Recombinant DNA
Technology
11.3 Processes of Recombinant
DNA Technology
Biotechnology deals with techniques of using live
organisms or enzymes from organisms to produce products
and processes useful to humans. In this sense, making
curd, bread or wine, which are all microbe-mediated
processes, could also be thought as a form of
biotechnology. However, it is used in a restricted sense
today, to refer to such of those processes which use
genetically modified organisms to achieve the same on a
larger scale. Further, many other processes/techniques are
also included under biotechnology. For example, in vitro
fertilisation leading to a ‘test-tube’ baby, synthesising a
gene and using it, developing a DNA vaccine or correcting
a defective gene, are all part of biotechnology.
The European Federation of Biotechnology (EFB) has
given a definition of biotechnology that encompasses both
traditional view and modern molecular biotechnology.
The definition given by EFB is as follows:
‘The integration of natural science and organisms,
cells, parts thereof, and molecular analogues for products
and services’.
11.1 P RINCIPLES
OF
B IOTECHNOLOGY
Among many, the two core techniques that enabled birth
of modern biotechnology are :
(i) Genetic engineering : Techniques to alter the
chemistry of genetic material (DNA and RNA),BIOLOGY
194
to introduce these into host organisms and thus change the
phenotype of the host organism.
(ii) Maintenance of sterile (microbial contamination-free) ambience
in chemical engineering processes to enable growth of only the
desired microbe/eukaryotic cell in large quantities for the
manufacture of biotechnological products like antibiotics,
vaccines, enzymes, etc.
Let us now understand the conceptual development of the principles
of genetic engineering.
You probably appreciate the advantages of sexual reproduction over
asexual reproduction. The former provides opportunities for variations
and formulation of unique combinations of genetic setup, some of which
may be beneficial to the organism as well as the population. Asexual
reproduction preserves the genetic information, while sexual reproduction
permits variation. Traditional hybridisation procedures used in plant and
animal breeding, very often lead to inclusion and multiplication of
undesirable genes along with the desired genes. The techniques of genetic
engineering which include creation of recombinant DNA, use of
gene cloning and gene transfer, overcome this limitation and allows us
to isolate and introduce only one or a set of desirable genes without
introducing undesirable genes into the target organism.
Do you know the likely fate of a piece of DNA, which is somehow
transferred into an alien organism? Most likely, this piece of DNA would
not be able to multiply itself in the progeny cells of the organism. But,
when it gets integrated into the genome of the recipient, it may multiply
and be inherited along with the host DNA. This is because the alien piece
of DNA has become part of a chromosome, which has the ability to
replicate. In a chromosome there is a specific DNA sequence called the
origin of replication, which is responsible for initiating replication.
Therefore, for the multiplication of any alien piece of DNA in an organism
it needs to be a part of a chromosome(s) which has a specific sequence
known as ‘origin of replication’. Thus, an alien DNA is linked with the
origin of replication, so that, this alien piece of DNA can replicate and
multiply itself in the host organism. This can also be called as cloning or
making multiple identical copies of any template DNA.
Let us now focus on the first instance of the construction of an artificial
recombinant DNA molecule. The construction of the first recombinant
DNA emerged from the possibility of linking a gene encoding antibiotic
resistance with a native plasmid (autonomously replicating circular
extra-chromosomal DNA) of Salmonella typhimurium. Stanley Cohen and
Herbert Boyer accomplished this in 1972 by isolating the antibiotic
resistance gene by cutting out a piece of DNA from a plasmid which was
responsible for conferring antibiotic resistance. The cutting of DNA at
specific locations became possible with the discovery of the so-calledBIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES
‘molecular scissors’– restriction enzymes. The cut piece of DNA was
then linked with the plasmid DNA. These plasmid DNA act as vectors to
transfer the piece of DNA attached to it. You probably know that mosquito
acts as an insect vector to transfer the malarial parasite into human body.
In the same way, a plasmid can be used as vector to deliver an alien piece
of DNA into the host organism. The linking of antibiotic resistance gene
with the plasmid vector became possible with the enzyme DNA ligase,
which acts on cut DNA molecules and joins their ends. This makes a new
combination of circular autonomously replicating DNA created in vitro
and is known as recombinant DNA. When this DNA is transferred into
Escherichia coli, a bacterium closely related to Salmonella, it could
replicate using the new host’s DNA polymerase enzyme and make multiple
copies. The ability to multiply copies of antibiotic resistance gene in
E. coli was called cloning of antibiotic resistance gene in E. coli.
You can hence infer that there are three basic steps in genetically
modifying an organism —
(i) identification of DNA with desirable genes;
(ii) introduction of the identified DNA into the host;
(iii) maintenance of introduced DNA in the host and transfer of the DNA
to its progeny.
11.2 T OOLS
OF
R ECOMBINANT DNA T ECHNOLOGY
Now we know from the foregoing discussion that genetic engineering or
recombinant DNA technology can be accomplished only if we have the
key tools, i.e., restriction enzymes, polymerase enzymes, ligases, vectors
and the host organism. Let us try to understand some of these in detail.
11.2.1 Restriction Enzymes
In the year 1963, the two enzymes responsible for restricting the growth
of bacteriophage in Escherichia coli were isolated. One of these added
methyl groups to DNA, while the other cut DNA. The later was called
restriction endonuclease.
The first restriction endonuclease–Hind II, whose functioning
depended on a specific DNA nucleotide sequence was isolated and
characterised five years later. It was found that Hind II always cut DNA
molecules at a particular point by recognising a specific sequence of
six base pairs. This specific base sequence is known as the
recognition sequence for Hind II. Besides Hind II, today we know more
than 900 restriction enzymes that have been isolated from over 230 strains
of bacteria each of which recognise different recognition sequences.
The convention for naming these enzymes is the first letter of the name
comes from the genus and the second two letters come from the species of
the prokaryotic cell from which they were isolated, e.g., EcoRI comes from
Escherichia coli RY 13. In EcoRI, the letter ‘R’ is derived from the name of
195BIOLOGY
strain. Roman numbers following the names indicate the order in which
the enzymes were isolated from that strain of bacteria.
Restriction enzymes belong to a larger class of enzymes called
nucleases. These are of two kinds; exonucleases and endonucleases.
Exonucleases remove nucleotides from the ends of the DNA whereas,
endonucleases make cuts at specific positions within the DNA.
Each restriction endonuclease functions by ‘inspecting’ the length of
a DNA sequence. Once it finds its specific recognition sequence, it
will bind to the DNA and cut each of the two strands of the double
helix at specific points in their sugar -phosphate backbones
(Figure 11.1). Each restriction endonuclease recognises a specific
palindromic nucleotide sequences in the DNA.
Figure 11.1 Steps in formation of recombinant DNA by action of restriction endonuclease
enzyme - EcoRI
196
Do you know what palindromes are? These are groups of letters
that form the same words when read both forward and backward,
e.g., “MALAYALAM”. As against a word-palindrome where the same
word is read in both directions, the palindrome in DNA is a sequence
of base pairs that reads same on the two strands when orientation ofBIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES
reading is kept the same. For example, the following sequences reads
the same on the two strands in 5 ' à 3 ' direction. This is also true if
read in the 3 ' à 5 ' direction.
5 ' —— GAATTC —— 3 '
3 ' —— CTTAAG —— 5 '
Restriction enzymes cut the strand of DNA a little away from the centre
of the palindrome sites, but between the same two bases on the opposite
strands. This leaves single stranded portions at the ends. There are
overhanging stretches called sticky ends on each strand (Figure 11.1).
These are named so because they form hydrogen bonds with their
complementary cut counterparts. This stickiness of the ends facilitates
the action of the enzyme DNA ligase.
Restriction endonucleases are used in genetic engineering to form
‘recombinant’ molecules of DNA, which are composed of DNA from
different sources/genomes.
When cut by the same restriction enzyme, the resultant DNA fragments
have the same kind of ‘sticky-ends’ and, these can be joined together
(end-to-end) using DNA ligases (Figure 11.2).
197
Figure 11.2 Diagrammatic representation of recombinant DNA technologyBIOLOGY
You may have realised that normally, unless one cuts the vector and
the source DNA with the same restriction enzyme, the recombinant vector
molecule cannot be created.
Separation and isolation of DNA fragments : The cutting of DNA by
restriction endonucleases results in the fragments of DNA. These fragments
can be separated by a technique known as gel electrophoresis. Since
DNA fragments are negatively charged molecules they can be separated
by forcing them to move towards the anode under an electric field through
a medium/matrix. Nowadays the most commonly used matrix is agarose
which is a natural polymer extracted from sea weeds. The DNA fragments
separate (resolve) according to their size through sieving effect provided
by the agarose gel. Hence, the smaller the fragment size, the farther it
moves. Look at the Figure 11.3 and guess at which end of the gel the
sample was loaded.
The separated DNA fragments can be
visualised only after staining the DNA
with a compound known as ethidium
bromide followed by exposure to UV
radiation (you cannot see pure DNA
fragments in the visible light and
without staining). You can see bright
orange coloured bands of DNA in a
ethidium bromide stained gel
exposed to UV light (Figure 11.3). The
separated bands of DNA are cut out
from the agarose gel and extracted
Figure 11.3 A typical agarose gel
from the gel piece. This step is known
electrophoresis showing
migration of undigested
as elution. The DNA fragments
(lane 1) and digested set of
purified in this way are used in
DNA fragments (lane 2 to 4)
constructing recombinant DNA by
joining them with cloning vectors.
11.2.2 Cloning Vectors
198
You know that plasmids and bacteriophages have the ability to replicate
within bacterial cells independent of the control of chromosomal DNA.
Bacteriophages because of their high number per cell, have very high
copy numbers of their genome within the bacterial cells. Some plasmids
may have only one or two copies per cell whereas others may have
15-100 copies per cell. Their numbers can go even higher. If we are able
to link an alien piece of DNA with bacteriophage or plasmid DNA, we can
multiply its numbers equal to the copy number of the plasmid or
bacteriophage. Vectors used at present, are engineered in such a way
that they help easy linking of foreign DNA and selection of recombinants
from non-recombinants.BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES
The following are the features that are required to facilitate cloning
into a vector.
(i) Origin of replication (ori) : This is a sequence from where
replication starts and any piece of DNA when linked to this sequence
can be made to replicate within the host cells. This sequence is also
responsible for controlling the copy number of the linked DNA. So,
if one wants to recover many copies of the target DNA it should be
cloned in a vector whose origin support high copy number.
(ii) Selectable marker : In addition to ‘ori’, the vector requires a
selectable marker, which helps in identifying and eliminating non-
transformants and selectively permitting the growth of the
transformants. Transformation is a procedure through which a
piece of DNA is introduced in a host bacterium (you will study the
process in subsequent section). Normally, the genes encoding
resistance to antibiotics such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol,
tetracycline or kanamycin, etc., are considered useful selectable
markers for E. coli. The normal E. coli cells do not carry resistance
against any of these antibiotics.
(iii) Cloning sites: In order to link the
alien DNA, the vector needs to have
very few, preferably single,
recognition sites for the commonly
used restriction enzymes. Presence of
more than one recognition sites within
the vector will generate several
fragments, which will complicate the
gene cloning (Figure 11.4). The
ligation of alien DNA is carried out at
a restriction site present in one of the
two antibiotic resistance genes. For
example, you can ligate a foreign DNA
Figure 11.4 E. coli cloning vector pBR322
at the BamH I site of tetracycline
showing restriction sites
resistance gene in the vector pBR322.
(Hind III, EcoR I, BamH I, Sal I,
Pvu II, Pst I, Cla I), ori and
The recombinant plasmids will lose
antibiotic resistance genes
tetracycline resistance due to insertion
(amp R and tet R ). rop codes for
of foreign DNA but can still be selected
the proteins involved in the
out from non-recombinant ones by
replication of the plasmid.
plating the transformants on ampicillin
containing medium. The transformants growing on ampicillin
199
containing medium are then transferred on a medium containing
tetracycline. The recombinants will grow in ampicillin containing
medium but not on that containing tetracycline. But, non-
recombinants will grow on the medium containing both the
antibiotics. In this case, one antibiotic resistance gene helps in
selecting the transformants, whereas the other antibiotic resistanceBIOLOGY
gene gets ‘inactivated due to insertion’ of alien DNA, and helps in
selection of recombinants.
Selection of recombinants due to inactivation of antibiotics is a
cumbersome procedure because it requires simultaneous plating
on two plates having different antibiotics. Therefore, alternative
selectable markers have been developed which differentiate
recombinants from non-recombinants on the basis of their ability
to produce colour in the presence of a chromogenic substrate. In
this, a recombinant DNA is inserted within the coding sequence of
an enzyme, β-galactosidase. This results into inactivation of the
enzyme, which is referred to as insertional inactivation. The
presence of a chromogenic substrate gives blue coloured colonies if
the plasmid in the bacteria does not have an insert. Presence of
insert results into insertional inactivation of the β -galactosidase and
the colonies do not produce any colour, these are identified as
recombinant colonies.
(iv) Vectors for cloning genes in plants and animals : You may be
surprised to know that we have learnt the lesson of transferring genes
into plants and animals from bacteria and viruses which have known
this for ages – how to deliver genes to transform eukaryotic cells and
force them to do what the bacteria or viruses want. For example,
Agrobacterium tumifaciens, a pathogen of several dicot plants is able
to deliver a piece of DNA known as ‘T-DNA’ to transform normal
plant cells into a tumor and direct these tumor cells to produce the
chemicals required by the pathogen. Similarly, retroviruses in animals
have the ability to transform normal cells into cancerous cells. A
better understanding of the art of delivering genes by pathogens in
their eukaryotic hosts has generated knowledge to transform these
tools of pathogens into useful vectors for delivering genes of interest
to humans. The tumor inducing (Ti) plasmid of Agrobacterium
tumifaciens has now been modified into a cloning vector which is no
more pathogenic to the plants but is still able to use the mechanisms
to deliver genes of our interest into a variety of plants. Similarly,
retroviruses have also been disarmed and are now used to deliver
desirable genes into animal cells. So, once a gene or a DNA fragment
has been ligated into a suitable vector it is transferred into a bacterial,
plant or animal host (where it multiplies).
200
11.2.3 Competent Host (For Transformation with
Recombinant DNA)
Since DNA is a hydrophilic molecule, it cannot pass through cell
membranes. Why? In order to force bacteria to take up the plasmid, the
bacterial cells must first be made ‘competent’ to take up DNA. This is
done by treating them with a specific concentration of a divalent cation,
such as calcium, which increases the efficiency with which DNA entersBIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES
the bacterium through pores in its cell wall. Recombinant DNA can then
be forced into such cells by incubating the cells with recombinant DNA
on ice, followed by placing them briefly at 42 0 C (heat shock), and then
putting them back on ice. This enables the bacteria to take up the
recombinant DNA.
This is not the only way to introduce alien DNA into host cells. In a
method known as micro-injection, recombinant DNA is directly injected
into the nucleus of an animal cell. In another method, suitable for plants,
cells are bombarded with high velocity micro-particles of gold or tungsten
coated with DNA in a method known as biolistics or gene gun. And the
last method uses ‘disarmed pathogen’ vectors, which when allowed to
infect the cell, transfer the recombinant DNA into the host.
Now that we have learnt about the tools for constructing recombinant
DNA, let us discuss the processes facilitating recombinant DNA technology.
11.3 P ROCESSES OF R ECOMBINANT DNA T ECHNOLOGY
Recombinant DNA technology involves several steps in specific
sequence such as isolation of DNA, fragmentation of DNA by
restriction endonucleases, isolation of a desired DNA fragment,
ligation of the DNA fragment into a vector, transferring the
recombinant DNA into the host, culturing the host cells in a
medium at large scale and extraction of the desired product.
Let us examine each of these steps in some details.
11.3.1 Isolation of the Genetic Material (DNA)
Recall that nucleic acid is the genetic material of all organisms
without exception. In majority of organisms this is
deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA. In order to cut the DNA with
restriction enzymes, it needs to be in pure form, free from other
macro-molecules. Since the DNA is enclosed within the
membranes, we have to break the cell open to release DNA along
with other macromolecules such as RNA, proteins,
polysaccharides and also lipids. This can be achieved by treating
Figure 11.5 DNA that
the bacterial cells/plant or animal tissue with enzymes such as
separates out can be
lysozyme (bacteria), cellulase (plant cells), chitinase (fungus).
removed by spooling
You know that genes are located on long molecules of DNA
201
interwined with proteins such as histones. The RNA can be removed by
treatment with ribonuclease whereas proteins can be removed by
treatment with protease. Other molecules can be removed by appropriate
treatments and purified DNA ultimately precipitates out after the addition
of chilled ethanol. This can be seen as collection of fine threads in the
suspension (Figure 11.5).BIOLOGY
11.3.2 Cutting of DNA at Specific Locations
Restriction enzyme digestions are performed by incubating purified DNA
molecules with the restriction enzyme, at the optimal conditions for that
specific enzyme. Agarose gel electrophoresis is employed to check the
progression of a restriction enzyme digestion. DNA is a negatively charged
molecule, hence it moves towards the positive electrode (anode)
(Figure 11.3). The process is repeated with the vector DNA also.
The joining of DNA involves several processes. After having cut the
source DNA as well as the vector DNA with a specific restriction enzyme,
the cut out ‘gene of interest’ from the source DNA and the cut vector with
space are mixed and ligase is added. This results in the preparation of
recombinant DNA.
11.3.3 Amplification of Gene of Interest using PCR
PCR stands for Polymerase Chain Reaction. In this reaction, multiple
copies of the gene (or DNA) of interest is synthesised in vitro using two
202
Figure 11.6
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) : Each cycle has three steps: (i) Denaturation;
(ii) Primer annealing; and (iii) Extension of primersBIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES
sets of primers (small chemically synthesised oligonucleotides that are
complementary to the regions of DNA) and the enzyme DNA polymerase.
The enzyme extends the primers using the nucleotides provided in the
reaction and the genomic DNA as template. If the process of replication
of DNA is repeated many times, the segment of DNA can be amplified
to approximately billion times, i.e., 1 billion copies are made. Such
repeated amplification is achieved by the use of a thermostable DNA
polymerase (isolated from a bacterium, Thermus aquaticus), which
remain active during the high temperature induced denaturation of
double stranded DNA. The amplified fragment if desired can now be
used to ligate with a vector for further cloning (Figure11.6).
11.3.4 Insertion of Recombinant DNA into the Host
Cell/Organism
There are several methods of introducing the ligated DNA into recipient
cells. Recipient cells after making them ‘competent’ to receive, take up
DNA present in its surrounding. So, if a recombinant DNA bearing gene
for resistance to an antibiotic (e.g., ampicillin) is transferred into E. coli
cells, the host cells become transformed into ampicillin-resistant cells. If
we spread the transformed cells on agar plates containing ampicillin, only
transformants will grow, untransformed recipient cells will die. Since, due
to ampicillin resistance gene, one is able to select a transformed cell in the
presence of ampicillin. The ampicillin resistance gene in this case is called
a selectable marker.
11.3.5 Obtaining the Foreign Gene Product
When you insert a piece of alien DNA into a cloning vector and transfer it
into a bacterial, plant or animal cell, the alien DNA gets multiplied. In
almost all recombinant technologies, the ultimate aim is to produce a
desirable protein. Hence, there is a need for the recombinant DNA to be
expressed. The foreign gene gets expressed under appropriate conditions.
The expression of foreign genes in host cells involve understanding many
technical details.
After having cloned the gene of interest and having optimised the
conditions to induce the expression of the target protein, one has to
consider producing it on a large scale. Can you think of any reason
why there is a need for large-scale production? If any protein encoding
gene is expressed in a heterologous host, it is called a recombinant
protein. The cells harbouring cloned genes of interest may be grown
on a small scale in the laboratory. The cultures may be used for
extracting the desired protein and then purifying it by using different
separation techniques.
The cells can also be multiplied in a continuous culture system wherein
the used medium is drained out from one side while fresh medium is
added from the other to maintain the cells in their physiologically most
203BIOLOGY
active log/exponential phase. This type of culturing method produces a
larger biomass leading to higher yields of desired protein.
Small volume cultures cannot yield appreciable quantities of products.
To produce in large quantities, the development of bioreactors, where
large volumes (100-1000 litres) of culture can be processed, was required.
Thus, bioreactors can be thought of as vessels in which raw materials are
biologically converted into specific products, individual enzymes, etc.,
using microbial plant, animal or human cells. A bioreactor provides the
optimal conditions for achieving the desired product by providing
optimum growth conditions (temperature, pH, substrate, salts, vitamins,
oxygen).
The most commonly used bioreactors are of stirring type, which are
shown in Figure 11.7.
(a)
Figure 11.7
204
(b)
(a) Simple stirred-tank bioreactor; (b) Sparged stirred-tank bioreactor through which
sterile air bubbles are sparged
A stirred-tank reactor is usually cylindrical or with a curved base to
facilitate the mixing of the reactor contents. The stirrer facilitates even
mixing and oxygen availability throughout the bioreactor. Alternatively
air can be bubbled through the reactor. If you look at the figure closely
you will see that the bioreactor has an agitator system, an oxygen delivery
system and a foam control system, a temperature control system, pH
control system and sampling ports so that small volumes of the culture
can be withdrawn periodically.
11.3.6 Downstream Processing
After completion of the biosynthetic stage, the product has to be subjected
through a series of processes before it is ready for marketing as a finishedBIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES
product. The processes include separation and purification, which are
collectively referred to as downstream processing. The product has to be
formulated with suitable preservatives. Such formulation has to undergo
thorough clinical trials as in case of drugs. Strict quality control testing
for each product is also required. The downstream processing and quality
control testing vary from product to product.
SUMMARY
Biotechnology deals with large scale production and marketing of
products and processes using live organisms, cells or enzymes.
Modern biotechnology using genetically modified organisms was
made possible only when man learnt to alter the chemistry of DNA
and construct recombinant DNA. This key process is called
recombinant DNA technology or genetic engineering. This process
involves the use of restriction endonucleases, DNA ligase,
appropriate plasmid or viral vectors to isolate and ferry the foreign
DNA into host organisms, expression of the foreign gene, purification
of the gene product, i.e., the functional protein and finally making a
suitable formulation for marketing. Large scale production involves
use of bioreactors.
EXERCISES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Can you list 10 recombinant proteins which are used in medical
practice? Find out where they are used as therapeutics (use the internet).
Make a chart (with diagrammatic representation) showing a restriction
enzyme, the substrate DNA on which it acts, the site at which it cuts
DNA and the product it produces.
From what you have learnt, can you tell whether enzymes are bigger or
DNA is bigger in molecular size? How did you know?
What would be the molar concentration of human DNA in a human
cell? Consult your teacher.
Do eukaryotic cells have restriction endonucleases? Justify your answer.
Besides better aeration and mixing properties, what other advantages
do stirred tank bioreactors have over shake flasks?
Collect 5 examples of palindromic DNA sequences by consulting your teacher.
Better try to create a palindromic sequence by following base-pair rules.
Can you recall meiosis and indicate at what stage a recombinant DNA
is made?
Can you think and answer how a reporter enzyme can be used to monitor
transformation of host cells by foreign DNA in addition to a selectable
marker?
205BIOLOGY
10. Describe briefly the following:
(a) Origin of replication
(b) Bioreactors
(c) Downstream processing
11. Explain briefly
(a) PCR
(b) Restriction enzymes and DNA
(c) Chitinase
12. Discuss with your teacher and find out how to distinguish between
(a) Plasmid DNA and Chromosomal DNA
(b) RNA and DNA
(c) Exonuclease and Endonuclease
206
CHAPTER 12
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS
APPLICATIONS
12.1 Biotechnological
Applications in
Agriculture
12.2 Biotechnological
Applications in
Medicine
12.3 Transgenic Animals
12.4 Ethical Issues
Biotechnology, as you would have learnt from the
previous chapter, essentially deals with industrial scale
production of biopharmaceuticals and biologicals using
genetically modified microbes, fungi, plants and animals.
The applications of biotechnology include therapeutics,
diagnostics, genetically modified crops for agriculture,
processed food, bioremediation, waste treatment, and
energy production. Three critical research areas of
biotechnology are:
(i) Providing the best catalyst in the form of improved
organism usually a microbe or pure enzyme.
(ii) Creating optimal conditions through engineering for
a catalyst to act, and
(iii) Downstream processing technologies to purify the
protein/organic compound.
Let us now learn how human beings have used
biotechnology to improve the quality of human life,
especially in the field of food production and health.
12.1 B IOTECHNOLOGICAL A PPLICATIONS
A GRICULTURE
IN
Let us take a look at the three options that can be thought
for increasing food production
(i) agro-chemical based agriculture;BIOLOGY
(ii) organic agriculture; and
(iii) genetically engineered crop-based agriculture.
The Green Revolution succeeded in tripling the food supply but yet
it was not enough to feed the growing human population. Increased yields
have partly been due to the use of improved crop varieties, but mainly
due to the use of better management practices and use of agrochemicals
(fertilisers and pesticides). However, for farmers in the developing world,
agrochemicals are often too expensive, and further increases in yield with
existing varieties are not possible using conventional breeding. Is there
any alternative path that our understanding of genetics can show so that
farmers may obtain maximum yield from their fields? Is there a way to
minimise the use of fertilisers and chemicals so that their harmful effects
on the environment are reduced? Use of genetically modified crops is a
possible solution.
Plants, bacteria, fungi and animals whose genes have been altered by
manipulation are called Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO). GM
plants have been useful in many ways. Genetic modification has:
(i) made crops more tolerant to abiotic stresses (cold, drought, salt,
heat).
(ii) reduced reliance on chemical pesticides (pest-resistant crops).
(iii) helped to reduce post harvest losses.
(iv) increased efficiency of mineral usage by plants (this prevents early
exhaustion of fertility of soil).
(v) enhanced nutritional value of food, e.g., Vitamin ‘A’ enriched rice.
In addition to these uses, GM has been used to create tailor-made
plants to supply alternative resources to industries, in the form of starches,
fuels and pharmaceuticals.
Some of the applications of biotechnology in agriculture that you will
study in detail are the production of pest resistant plants, which could
decrease the amount of pesticide used. Bt toxin is produced by a
bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt for short). Bt toxin gene has
been cloned from the bacteria and been expressed in plants to provide
resistance to insects without the need for insecticides; in effect created a
bio-pesticide. Examples are Bt cotton, Bt corn, rice, tomato, potato and
soyabean etc.
208
Bt Cotton: Some strains of Bacillus thuringiensis produce proteins that
kill certain insects such as lepidopterans (tobacco budworm, armyworm),
coleopterans (beetles) and dipterans (flies, mosquitoes). B. thuringiensis
forms protein crystals during a particular phase of their growth. These
crystals contain a toxic insecticidal protein. Why does this toxin not kill
the Bacillus? Actually, the Bt toxin protein exist as inactive protoxins but
once an insect ingest the inactive toxin, it is converted into an active form
of toxin due to the alkaline pH of the gut which solubilise the crystals.
The activated toxin binds to the surface of midgut epithelial cells andBIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
create pores that cause cell swelling and lysis and eventually cause death
of the insect.
Specific Bt toxin genes were isolated from Bacillus thuringiensis and
incorporated into the several crop plants such as cotton (Figure 12.1).
The choice of genes depends upon the crop and the targeted pest, as
most Bt toxins are insect-group specific. The toxin is coded by a gene
named cry. There are a number of them, for example, the proteins encoded
by the genes cryIAc and cryIIAb control the cotton bollworms, that of
cryIAb controls corn borer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.1 Cotton boll: (a) destroyed by bollworms; (b) a fully mature
cotton boll
Pest Resistant Plants: Several nematodes parasitise a wide variety of
plants and animals including human beings. A nematode Meloidegyne
incognitia infects the roots of tobacco plants and causes a great reduction
in yield. A novel strategy was adopted to prevent this infestation which
was based on the process of RNA interference (RNAi). RNAi takes place
in all eukaryotic organisms as a method of cellular defense. This method
involves silencing of a specific mRNA due to a complementary dsRNA
molecule that binds to and prevents translation of the mRNA (silencing).
The source of this complementary RNA could be from an infection by
viruses having RNA genomes or mobile genetic elements (transposons)
that replicate via an RNA intermediate.
Using Agrobacterium vectors, nematode-specific genes were
introduced into the host plant (Figure 12.2). The introduction of DNA
was such that it produced both sense and anti-sense RNA in the host
cells. These two RNA’s being complementary to each other formed a double
stranded (dsRNA) that initiated RNAi and thus, silenced the specific mRNA
209BIOLOGY
of the nematode. The consequence was that the parasite could not survive
in a transgenic host expressing specific interfering RNA. The transgenic
plant therefore got itself protected from the parasite (Figure 12.2).
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.2 Host plant-generated dsRNA triggers protection against nematode infestation:
(a) Roots of a typical control plants; (b) transgenic plant roots 5 days after deliberate
infection of nematode but protected through novel mechanism.
12.2 B IOTECHNOLOGICAL A PPLICATIONS
IN
M EDICINE
The recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense impact
in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe and more
effective therapeutic drugs. Further, the recombinant therapeutics do not
induce unwanted immunological responses as is common in case of
similar products isolated from non-human sources. At present, about
30 recombinant therapeutics have been approved for human-use the
world over. In India, 12 of these are presently being marketed.
12.2.1 Genetically Engineered Insulin
210
Management of adult-onset diabetes is possible by taking insulin at
regular time intervals. What would a diabetic patient do if enough
human-insulin was not available? If you discuss this, you would soon
realise that one would have to isolate and use insulin from other animals.
Would the insulin isolated from other animals be just as effective as
that secreted by the human body itself and would it not elicit an immune
response in the human body? Now, imagine if bacterium were available
that could make human insulin. Suddenly the whole process becomes
so simple. You can easily grow a large quantity of the bacteria and make
as much insulin as you need.
Think about whether insulin can be orally administered to diabetic
people or not. Why?BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Insulin used for diabetes was earlier extracted from
pancreas of slaughtered cattle and pigs. Insulin from an
animal source, though caused some patients to develop
allergy or other types of reactions to the foreign
protein. Insulin consists of two short polypeptide
chains: chain A and chain B, that are linked together by
disulphide bridges (Figure 12.3). In mammals, including
humans, insulin is synthesised as a pro-hormone (like a
pro-enzyme, the pro-hormone also needs to be processed
before it becomes a fully mature and functional hormone)
which contains an extra stretch called the C peptide.
This C peptide is not present in the mature insulin and is Figure 12.3 Maturation of
removed during maturation into insulin.The main
pro-insulin into insulin
(simplified)
challenge for production of insulin using rDNA techniques
was getting insulin assembled into a mature form. In
1983, Eli Lilly an American company prepared two DNA sequences
corresponding to A and B, chains of human insulin and introduced them
in plasmids of E. coli to produce insulin chains. Chains A and B were
produced separately, extracted and combined by creating disulfide bonds
to form human insulin.
12.2.2 Gene Therapy
If a person is born with a hereditary disease, can a corrective therapy
be taken for such a disease? Gene therapy is an attempt to do this.
Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a
gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child/embryo. Here genes
are inserted into a person’s cells and tissues to treat a disease.
Correction of a genetic defect involves delivery of a normal gene into
the individual or embryo to take over the function of and compensate
for the non-functional gene.
The first clinical gene therapy was given in 1990 to a 4-year old girl
with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. This enzyme is crucial for
the immune system to function. The disorder is caused due to the deletion
of the gene for adenosine deaminase. In some children ADA deficiency
can be cured by bone marrow transplantation; in others it can be treated
by enzyme replacement therapy, in which functional ADA is given to the
patient by injection. But the problem with both of these approaches that
they are not completely curative. As a first step towards gene therapy,
lymphocytes from the blood of the patient are grown in a culture outside
the body. A functional ADA cDNA (using a retroviral vector) is then
introduced into these lymphocytes, which are subsequently returned to
the patient. However, as these cells are not immortal, the patient requires
periodic infusion of such genetically engineered lymphocytes. However, if
the gene isolate from marrow cells producing ADA is introduced into cells
at early embryonic stages, it could be a permanent cure.
211BIOLOGY
12.2.3 Molecular Diagnosis
You know that for effective treatment of a disease, early diagnosis and
understanding its pathophysiology is very important. Using conventional
methods of diagnosis (serum and urine analysis, etc.) early detection is
not possible. Recombinant DNA technology, Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) and Enzyme Linked Immuno-sorbent Assay (ELISA) are some of
the techniques that serve the purpose of early diagnosis.
Presence of a pathogen (bacteria, viruses, etc.) is normally suspected
only when the pathogen has produced a disease symptom. By this time
the concentration of pathogen is already very high in the body. However,
very low concentration of a bacteria or virus (at a time when the symptoms
of the disease are not yet visible) can be detected by amplification of their
nucleic acid by PCR. Can you explain how PCR can detect very low
amounts of DNA? PCR is now routinely used to detect HIV in suspected
AIDS patients. It is being used to detect mutations in genes in suspected
cancer patients too. It is a powerful techqnique to identify many other
genetic disorders.
A single stranded DNA or RNA, tagged with a radioactive molecule
(probe) is allowed to hybridise to its complementary DNA in a clone of
cells followed by detection using autoradiography. The clone having the
mutated gene will hence not appear on the photographic film, because
the probe will not have complementarity with the mutated gene.
ELISA is based on the principle of antigen-antibody interaction.
Infection by pathogen can be detected by the presence of antigens
(proteins, glycoproteins, etc.) or by detecting the antibodies synthesised
against the pathogen.
12.3 T RANSGENIC A NIMALS
212
Animals that have had their DNA manipulated to possess and express an
extra (foreign) gene are known as transgenic animals. Transgenic rats,
rabbits, pigs, sheep, cows and fish have been produced, although over
95 per cent of all existing transgenic animals are mice. Why are these
animals being produced? How can man benefit from such modifications?
Let us try and explore some of the common reasons:
(i) Normal physiology and development: Transgenic animals can
be specifically designed to allow the study of how genes are
regulated, and how they affect the normal functions of the body
and its development, e.g., study of complex factors involved in growth
such as insulin-like growth factor. By introducing genes from other
species that alter the formation of this factor and studying the
biological effects that result, information is obtained about the
biological role of the factor in the body.
(ii) Study of disease: Many transgenic animals are designed to increase
our understanding of how genes contribute to the development ofBIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
disease. These are specially made to serve as models for human
diseases so that investigation of new treatments for diseases is made
possible. Today transgenic models exist for many human diseases
such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer’s.
(iii) Biological products: Medicines required to treat certain human
diseases can contain biological products, but such products are
often expensive to make. Transgenic animals that produce useful
biological products can be created by the introduction of the portion
of DNA (or genes) which codes for a particular product such as
human protein (α-1-antitrypsin) used to treat emphysema. Similar
attempts are being made for treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU)
and cystic fibrosis. In 1997, the first transgenic cow, Rosie, produced
human protein-enriched milk (2.4 grams per litre). The milk
contained the human alpha-lactalbumin and was nutritionally a
more balanced product for human babies than natural cow-milk.
(iv) Vaccine safety: Transgenic mice are being developed for use in
testing the safety of vaccines before they are used on humans.
Transgenic mice are being used to test the safety of the polio vaccine.
If successful and found to be reliable, they could replace the use of
monkeys to test the safety of batches of the vaccine.
(v) Chemical safety testing: This is known as toxicity/safety testing.
The procedure is the same as that used for testing toxicity of drugs.
Transgenic animals are made that carry genes which make them more
sensitive to toxic substances than non-transgenic animals. They are
then exposed to the toxic substances and the effects studied. Toxicity
testing in such animals will allow us to obtain results in less time.
12.4 E THICAL I SSUES
The manipulation of living organisms by the human race cannot go on
any further, without regulation. Some ethical standards are required to
evaluate the morality of all human activities that might help or harm living
organisms.
Going beyond the morality of such issues, the biological significance
of such things is also important. Genetic modification of organisms can
have unpredicatable results when such organisms are introduced into
the ecosystem.
Therefore, the Indian Government has set up organisations such as
GEAC (Genetic Engineering Approval Committee), which will make
decisions regarding the validity of GM research and the safety of
introducing GM-organisms for public services.
The modification/usage of living organisms for public services (as food
and medicine sources, for example) has also created problems with patents
granted for the same.
213BIOLOGY
214
There is growing public anger that certain companies are being
granted patents for products and technologies that make use of the
genetic materials, plants and other biological resources that have long
been identified, developed and used by farmers and indigenous people
of a specific region/country.
Rice is an important food grain, the presence of which goes back
thousands of years in Asia’s agricultural history. There are an estimated
200,000 varieties of rice in India alone. The diversity of rice in India is
one of the richest in the world. Basmati rice is distinct for its unique
aroma and flavour and 27 documented varieties of Basmati are grown
in India. There is reference to Basmati in ancient texts, folklore and
poetry, as it has been grown for centuries. In 1997, an American
company got patent rights on Basmati rice through the US Patent and
Trademark Office. This allowed the company to sell a ‘new’ variety of
Basmati, in the US and abroad. This ‘new’ variety of Basmati had actually
been derived from Indian farmer’s varieties. Indian Basmati was crossed
with semi-dwarf varieties and claimed as an invention or a novelty. The
patent extends to functional equivalents, implying that other people
selling Basmati rice could be restricted by the patent. Several attempts
have also been made to patent uses, products and processes based on
Indian traditional herbal medicines, e.g., turmeric neem. If we are not
vigilant and we do not immediately counter these patent applications,
other countries/individuals may encash on our rich legacy and we may
not be able to do anything about it.
Biopiracy is the term used to refer to the use of bio-resources by
multinational companies and other organisations without proper
authorisation from the countries and people concerned without
compensatory payment.
Most of the industrialised nations are rich financially but poor in
biodiversity and traditional knowledge. In contrast the developing and
the underdeveloped world is rich in biodiversity and traditional
knowledge related to bio-resources. Traditional knowledge related to
bio-resources can be exploited to develop modern applications and can
also be used to save time, effort and expenditure during their
commercialisation.
There has been growing realisation of the injustice, inadequate
compensation and benefit sharing between developed and developing
countries. Therefore, some nations are developing laws to prevent such
unauthorised exploitation of their bio-resources and traditional
knowledge.
The Indian Parliament has recently cleared the second amendment
of the Indian Patents Bill, that takes such issues into consideration,
including patent terms emergency provisions and research and
development initiative.BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
SUMMARY
Biotechnology has given to humans several useful products by using
microbes, plant, animals and their metabolic machinery. Recombinant
DNA technology has made it possible to engineer microbes, plants
and animals such that they have novel capabilities. Genetically
Modified Organisms have been created by using methods other than
natural methods to transfer one or more genes from one organism to
another, generally using techniques such as recombinant DNA
technology.
GM plants have been useful in increasing crop yields, reduce post-
harvest losses and make crops more tolerant of stresses. There are
several GM crop plants with improved nutritional value of foods and
reduced the reliance on chemical pesticides (pest-resistant crops).
Recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense
impact in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe
and more effective therapeutics. Since the recombinant therapeutics
are identical to human proteins, they do not induce unwanted
immunological responses and are free from risk of infection as was
observed in case of similar products isolated from non-human sources.
Human insulin is made in bacteria yet its structure is absolutely
identical to that of the natural molecule.
Transgenic animals are also used to understand how genes
contribute to the development of a disease by serving as models for
human diseases, such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis
and Alzheimer’s.
Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into an individual’s cells
and tissues to treat diseases especially hereditary diseases. It does
so by replacing a defective mutant allele with a functional one or
gene targeting which involves gene amplification. Viruses that attack
their hosts and introduce their genetic material into the host cell as
part of their replication cycle are used as vectors to transfer healthy
genes or more recently portions of genes.
The current interest in the manipulation of microbes, plants, and
animals has raised serious ethical questions.
EXERCISES
1.
Crystals of Bt toxin produced by some bacteria do not kill the bacteria
themselves because –
(a) bacteria are resistant to the toxin
(b) toxin is immature;
(c)
toxin is inactive;
(d) bacteria encloses toxin in a special sac.
2. What are transgenic bacteria? Illustrate using any one example.
3. Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of production
of genetically modified crops.
215BIOLOGY
4. What are Cry proteins? Name an organism that produce it. How has
man exploited this protein to his benefit?
5. What is gene therapy? Illustrate using the example of adenosine
deaminase (ADA) deficiency.
6. Digrammatically represent the experimental steps in cloning and
expressing an human gene (say the gene for growth hormone) into a
bacterium like E. coli ?
7. Can you suggest a method to remove oil (hydrocarbon) from seeds based
on your understanding of rDNA technology and chemistry of oil?
8. Find out from internet what is golden rice.
9. Does our blood have proteases and nucleases?
10. Consult internet and find out how to make orally active protein
pharmaceutical. What is the major problem to be encountered?
216
Chapter 13
Organisms and Populations
Chapter 14
Ecosystem
Chapter 15
Biodiversity and Conservation
Chapter 16
Environmental Issues
Diversity is not only a characteristic of living organisms but
also of content in biology textbooks. Biology is presented either
as botany, zoology and microbiology or as classical and
modern. The latter is a euphemism for molecular aspects of
biology. Luckily we have many threads which weave the
different areas of biological information into a unifying
principle. Ecology is one such thread which gives us a holistic
perspective to biology. The essence of biological understanding
is to know how organisms, while remaining an individual,
interact with other organisms and physical habitats as a group
and hence behave like organised wholes, i.e., population,
community, ecosystem or even as the whole biosphere.
Ecology explains to us all this. A particular aspect of this is the
study of anthropogenic environmental degradation and the
socio-political issues it has raised. This unit describes as well as
takes a critical view of the above aspects.
2017-18R AMDEO M ISRA
(1908-1998)
Ramdeo Misra is revered as the Father of Ecology in India. Born on 26 August
1908, Ramdeo Misra obtained Ph.D in Ecology (1937) under Prof. W. H. Pearsall,
FRS, from Leeds University in UK. He established teaching and research in
ecology at the Department of Botany of the Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi. His research laid the foundations for understanding of tropical
communities and their succession, environmental responses of plant
populations and productivity and nutrient cycling in tropical forest and
grassland ecosystems. Misra formulated the first postgraduate course in
ecology in India. Over 50 scholars obtained Ph. D degree under his supervision
and moved on to other universities and research institutes to initiate ecology
teaching and research across the country.
He was honoured with the Fellowships of the Indian National Science
Academy and World Academy of Arts and Science, and the prestigious Sanjay
Gandhi Award in Environment and Ecology. Due to his efforts, the
Government of India established the National Committee for Environmental
Planning and Coordination (1972) which, in later years, paved the way
for the establishment of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (1984).
2017-18CHAPTER 13
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
13.1 Organism and Its
Environment
13.2 Populations
Our living world is fascinatingly diverse and amazingly
complex. We can try to understand its complexity by
investigating processes at various levels of biological
organisation–macromolecules, cells, tissues, organs,
individual organisms, population, communities and
ecosystems and biomes. At any level of biological
organisation we can ask two types of questions – for
example, when we hear the bulbul singing early morning
in the garden, we may ask – ‘How does the bird sing ?’
Or, ‘Why does the bird sing ?’ The ‘how-type’ questions
seek the mechanism behind the process while the ‘why-
type’ questions seek the significance of the process. For
the first question in our example, the answer might be in
terms of the operation of the voice box and the vibrating
bone in the bird, whereas for the second question the
answer may lie in the bird’s need to communicate with its
mate during breeding season. When you observe nature
around you with a scientific frame of mind you will
certainly come up with many interesting questions of both
types - Why are night-blooming flowers generally white?
How does the bee know which flower has nectar? Why
does cactus have so many thorns? How does the chick
recognise her own mother ?, and so on.
2017-18BIOLOGY
You have already learnt in previous classes that Ecology is a subject
which studies the interactions among organisms and between the
organism and its physical (abiotic) environment.
Ecology is basically concerned with four levels of biological
organisation – organisms, populations, communities and biomes. In this
chapter we explore ecology at organismic and population levels.
13.1 O RGANISM
AND
I TS E NVIRONMENT
Ecology at the organismic level is essentially physiological ecology which
tries to understand how different organisms are adapted to their
environments in terms of not only survival but also reproduction. You
may have learnt in earlier classes how the rotation of our planet around
the Sun and the tilt of its axis cause annual variations in the intensity
and duration of temperature, resulting in distinct seasons. These
variations together with annual variation in precipitation (remember
precipitation includes both rain and snow) account for the formation of
major biomes such as desert, rain forest and tundra (Figure 13.1).
Figure 13.1 Biome distribution with respect to annual temperature and precipitation
220
Regional and local variations within each biome lead to the formation of a
wide variety of habitats. Major biomes of India are shown in Figure 13.2.
On planet Earth, life exists not just in a few favourable habitats but even
in extreme and harsh habitats – scorching Rajasthan desert, perpetually
rain-soaked Meghalaya forests, deep ocean trenches, torrential streams,
permafrost polar regions, high mountain tops, boiling thermal springs,
and stinking compost pits, to name a few. Even our intestine is a unique
habitat for hundreds of species of microbes.
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 13.2 Major biomes of India : (a) Tropical rain forest; (b) Deciduous forest;
(c) Desert; (d) Sea coast
What are the key elements that lead to so much variation in the
physical and chemical conditions of different habitats? The most
important ones are temperature, water, light and soil. We must remember
that the physico-chemical (abiotic) components alone do not characterise
the habitat of an organism completely; the habitat includes biotic
components also – pathogens, parasites, predators and competitors – of
the organism with which they interact constantly. We assume that over a
period of time, the organism had through natural selection, evolved
adaptations to optimise its survival and reproduction in its habitat. (Please
see Page 290 also)
13.1.1 Major Abiotic Factors
Temperature: Temperature is the most ecologically relevant
environmental factor. You are aware that the average temperature on
land varies seasonally, decreases progressively from the equator towards
the poles and from plains to the mountain tops. It ranges from subzero
levels in polar areas and high altitudes to >50 0 C in tropical deserts in
summer. There are, however, unique habitats such as thermal springs
and deep-sea hydrothermal vents where average temperatures exceed
100 0 C. It is general knowledge that mango trees do not and cannot grow
in temperate countries like Canada and Germany, snow leopards are not
found in Kerala forests and tuna fish are rarely caught beyond tropical
221
2017-18BIOLOGY
latitudes in the ocean. You can readily appreciate the significance of
temperature to living organisms when you realise that it affects the kinetics
of enzymes and through it the basal metabolism, activity and other
physiological functions of the organism. A few organisms can tolerate and
thrive in a wide range of temperatures (they are called eurythermal), but, a
vast majority of them are restricted to a narrow range of temperatures (such
organisms are called stenothermal ). The levels of thermal tolerance of
different species determine to a large extent their geographical distribution.
Can you think of a few eurythermal and stenothermal animals and
plants?
In recent years, there has been a growing concern about the gradually
increasing average global temperatures (Chapter 16 ). If this trend
continues, would you expect the distributional range of some species to
be affected?
Water: Next to temperature, water is the most important factor influencing
the life of organisms. In fact, life on earth originated in water and is
unsustainable without water. Its availability is so limited in deserts that
only special adaptations make it possible to live there. The productivity
and distribution of plants is also heavily dependent on water. You might
think that organisms living in oceans, lakes and rivers should not face
any water-related problems, but it is not true. For aquatic organisms the
quality (chemical composition, pH) of water becomes important. The salt
concentration (measured as salinity in parts per thousand), is less than
5 in inland waters, 30-35 in the sea and > 100 in some hypersaline
lagoons. Some organisms are tolerant of a wide range of salinities
(euryhaline) but others are restricted to a narrow range (stenohaline).
Many freshwater animals cannot live for long in sea water and vice versa
because of the osmotic problems, they would face.
222
Light: Since plants produce food through photosynthesis, a process which
is only possible when sunlight is available as a source of energy, we can
quickly understand the importance of light for living organisms,
particularly autotrophs. Many species of small plants (herbs and shrubs)
growing in forests are adapted to photosynthesise optimally under very
low light conditions because they are constantly overshadowed by tall,
canopied trees. Many plants are also dependent on sunlight to meet their
photoperiodic requirement for flowering. For many animals too, light is
important in that they use the diurnal and seasonal variations in light
intensity and duration (photoperiod) as cues for timing their foraging,
reproductive and migratory activities. The availability of light on land is
closely linked with that of temperature since the sun is the source for
both. But, deep (>500m) in the oceans, the environment is perpetually
dark and its inhabitants are not aware of the existence of a celestial source
of energy called Sun. What, then is their source of energy?. The spectral
quality of solar radiation is also important for life. The UV component of
the spectrum is harmful to many organisms while not all the colour
components of the visible spectrum are available for marine plants living
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
at different depths of the ocean. Among the red, green and brown algae
that inhabit the sea, which is likely to be found in the deepest waters?
Why?
Soil: The nature and properties of soil in different places vary; it is
dependent on the climate, the weathering process, whether soil is
transported or sedimentary and how soil development occurred. Various
characteristics of the soil such as soil composition, grain size and
aggregation determine the percolation and water holding capacity of the
soils. These characteristics along with parameters such as pH, mineral
composition and topography determine to a large extent the vegetation in
any area. This in turn dictates the type of animals that can be supported.
Similarly, in the aquatic environment, the sediment-characteristics often
determine the type of benthic animals that can thrive there.
13.1.2 Responses to Abiotic Factors
Having realised that the abiotic conditions of many habitats may vary
drastically in time, we now ask–how do the organisms living in such
habitats cope or manage with stressful conditions? But before attempting
to answer this question, we should perhaps ask first why a highly variable
external environment should bother organisms after all. One would expect
that during the course of millions of years of their existence, many species
would have evolved a relatively constant internal (within the body)
environment that permits all biochemical reactions and physiological
functions to proceed with maximal
efficiency and thus, enhance the overall
‘fitness’ of the species. This constancy, for
example, could be in terms of optimal
temperature and osmotic concentration of
body fluids. Ideally then, the organism
should try to maintain the constancy of its
internal environment (a process called
homeostasis) despite varying external
environmental conditions that tend to
upset its homeostasis. Let us take an
analogy to clarify this important concept.
Suppose a person is able to perform his/
her best when the temperature is 25 0 C and
Figure 13.3 Diagrammatic representation of
organismic response
wishes to maintain it so, even when it is
scorchingly hot or freezingly cold outside.
It could be achieved at home, in the car while travelling, and at workplace
223
by using an air conditioner in summer and heater in winter. Then his/
her performance would be always maximal regardless of the weather
around him/her. Here the person’s homeostasis is accomplished, not
through physiological, but artificial means. How do other living
organisms cope with the situation? Let us look at various possibilities
(Figure 13.3).
2017-18BIOLOGY
224
(i) Regulate : Some organisms are able to maintain homeostasis by
physiological (sometimes behavioural also) means which ensures
constant body temperature, constant osmotic concentration, etc.
All birds and mammals, and a very few lower vertebrate and
invertebrate species are indeed capable of such regulation
(thermoregulation and osmoregulation). Evolutionary biologists
believe that the ‘success’ of mammals is largely due to their ability
to maintain a constant body temperature and thrive whether they
live in Antarctica or in the Sahara desert.
The mechanisms used by most mammals to regulate their body
temperature are similar to the ones that we humans use. We maintain
a constant body temperature of 37 0 C. In summer, when outside
temperature is more than our body temperature, we sweat profusely.
The resulting evaporative cooling, similar to what happens with a
desert cooler in operation, brings down the body temperature. In
winter when the temperature is much lower than 37 0 C, we start to
shiver, a kind of exercise which produces heat and raises the body
temperature. Plants, on the other hand, do not have such
mechanisms to maintain internal temperatures.
(ii) Conform : An overwhelming majority (99 per cent) of animals and
nearly all plants cannot maintain a constant internal environment.
Their body temperature changes with the ambient temperature. In
aquatic animals, the osmotic concentration of the body fluids
change with that of the ambient water osmotic concentration. These
animals and plants are simply conformers. Considering the benefits
of a constant internal environment to the organism, we must ask
why these conformers had not evolved to become regulators. Recall
the human analogy we used above; much as they like, how many
people can really afford an air conditioner? Many simply ‘sweat it
out’ and resign themselves to suboptimal performance in hot
summer months. Thermoregulation is energetically expensive for
many organisms. This is particularly true for small animals like
shrews and humming birds. Heat loss or heat gain is a function of
surface area. Since small animals have a larger surface area relative
to their volume, they tend to lose body heat very fast when it is cold
outside; then they have to expend much energy to generate body
heat through metabolism. This is the main reason why very small
animals are rarely found in polar regions. During the course of
evolution, the costs and benefits of maintaining a constant internal
environment are taken into consideration. Some species have evolved
the ability to regulate, but only over a limited range of environmental
conditions, beyond which they simply conform.
If the stressful external conditions are localised or remain only
for a short duration, the organism has two other alternatives.
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
(iii) Migrate : The organism can move away temporarily from the
stressful habitat to a more hospitable area and return when stressful
period is over. In human analogy, this strategy is like a person
moving from Delhi to Shimla for the duration of summer. Many
animals, particularly birds, during winter undertake long-distance
migrations to more hospitable areas. Every winter the famous
Keolado National Park (Bharatpur) in Rajasthan host thousands of
migratory birds coming from Siberia and other extremely cold
northern regions.
(iv) Suspend: In bacteria, fungi and lower plants, various kinds of thick-
walled spores are formed which help them to survive unfavourable
conditions – these germinate on availability of suitable environment.
In higher plants, seeds and some other vegetative reproductive
structures serve as means to tide over periods of stress besides helping
in dispersal – they germinate to form new plants under favourable
moisture and temperature conditions. They do so by reducing their
metabolic activity and going into a state of ‘dormancy’.
In animals, the organism, if unable to migrate, might avoid the
stress by escaping in time. The familiar case of bears going into
hibernation during winter is an example of escape in time. Some
snails and fish go into aestivation to avoid summer–related
problems-heat and dessication. Under unfavourable conditions
many zooplankton species in lakes and ponds are known to enter
diapause, a stage of suspended development.
13.1.3 Adaptations
While considering the various alternatives available to organisms for
coping with extremes in their environment, we have seen that some are
able to respond through certain physiological adjustments while others
do so behaviourally (migrating temporarily to a less stressful habitat).
These responses are also actually, their adaptations. So, we can say that
adaptation is any attribute of the organism (morphological, physiological,
behavioural) that enables the organism to survive and reproduce in its
habitat. Many adaptations have evolved over a long evolutionary time
and are genetically fixed. In the absence of an external source of water,
the kangaroo rat in North American deserts is capable of meeting all its
water requirements through its internal fat oxidation (in which water is
a by product). It also has the ability to concentrate its urine so that
minimal volume of water is used to remove excretory products.
Many desert plants have a thick cuticle on their leaf surfaces and
have their stomata arranged in deep pits to minimise water loss through
transpiration. They also have a special photosynthetic pathway (CAM)
that enables their stomata to remain closed during day time. Some desert
plants like Opuntia, have no leaves – they are reduced to spines–and the
photosynthetic function is taken over by the flattened stems.
225
2017-18BIOLOGY
Mammals from colder climates generally have shorter ears and limbs
to minimise heat loss. (This is called the Allen’s Rule.) In the polar seas
aquatic mammals like seals have a thick layer of fat (blubber) below their
skin that acts as an insulator and reduces loss of body heat.
Some organisms possess adaptations that are physiological which
allow them to respond quickly to a stressful situation. If you had ever
been to any high altitude place (>3,500m Rohtang Pass near Manali and
Mansarovar, in China occupied Tibet) you must have experienced what
is called altitude sickness. Its symptoms include nausea, fatigue and
heart palpitations. This is because in the low atmospheric pressure of
high altitudes, the body does not get enough oxygen. But, gradually you
get acclimatised and stop experiencing altitude sickness. How did your
body solve this problem? The body compensates low oxygen availability
by increasing red blood cell production, decreasing the binding affinity
of hemoglobin and by increasing breathing rate. Many tribes live in the
high altitude of Himalayas. Find out if they normally have a higher red
blood cell count (or total hemoglobin) than people living in the plains.
In most animals, the metabolic reactions and hence all the
physiological functions proceed optimally in a narrow temperature range
(in humans, it is 37 0 C). But there are microbes (archaebacteria) that
flourish in hot springs and deep sea hydrothermal vents where
temperatures far exceed 100 0 C. How is this possible?
Many fish thrive in Antarctic waters where the temperature is always
below zero. How do they manage to keep their body fluids from freezing?
A large variety of marine invertebrates and fish live at great depths in
the ocean where the pressure could be >100 times the normal atmospheric
pressure that we experience. How do they live under such crushing
pressures and do they have any special enzymes? Organisms living in
such extreme environments show a fascinating array of biochemical
adaptations.
Some organisms show behavioural responses to cope with variations
in their environment. Desert lizards lack the physiological ability that
mammals have to deal with the high temperatures of their habitat, but
manage to keep their body temperature fairly constant by behavioural
means. They bask in the sun and absorb heat when their body
temperature drops below the comfort zone, but move into shade when
the ambient temperature starts increasing. Some species are capable of
burrowing into the soil to hide and escape from the above-ground heat.
226
13.2 P OPULATIONS
13.2.1 Population Attributes
In nature, we rarely find isolated, single individuals of any species; majority
of them live in groups in a well defined geographical area, share or compete
for similar resources, potentially interbreed and thus constitute a
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
population. Although the term interbreeding implies sexual reproduction,
a group of individuals resulting from even asexual reproduction is also
generally considered a population for the purpose of ecological studies.
All the cormorants in a wetland, rats in an abandoned dwelling, teakwood
trees in a forest tract, bacteria in a culture plate and lotus plants in a
pond, are some examples of a population. In earlier chapters you have
learnt that although an individual organism is the one that has to cope
with a changed environment, it is at the population level that natural
selection operates to evolve the desired traits. Population ecology is,
therefore, an important area of ecology because it links ecology to
population genetics and evolution.
A population has certain attributes that an individual organism does
not. An individual may have births and deaths, but a population has birth
rates and death rates. In a population these rates refer to per capita births
and deaths, respectively. The rates, hence, expressed is change in numbers
(increase or decrease) with respect to members of the population. Here is an
example. If in a pond there are 20 lotus plants last year and through
reproduction 8 new plants are added, taking the current population to 28,
we calculate the birth rate as 8/20 = 0.4 offspring per lotus per year. If 4
individuals in a laboratory population of 40 fruitflies died during a specified
time interval, say a week, the death rate in the population during that period
is 4/40 = 0.1 individuals per fruitfly per week.
Another attribute characteristic of a population is sex ratio. An
individual is either a male or a female but a population has a sex ratio
(e.g., 60 per cent of the population are females and 40 per cent males).
A population at any given time is composed of individuals of different
ages. If the age distribution (per cent individuals of a given age or age
group) is plotted for the population, the resulting structure is called an
age pyramid (Figure 13.4). For human population, the age pyramids
generally show age distribution of males and females in a combined
diagram. The shape of the pyramids reflects the growth status of the
population - (a) whether it is growing, (b) stable or (c) declining.
227
Figure 13.4 Representation of age pyramids for human population
The size of the population tells us a lot about its status in the habitat.
Whatever ecological processes we wish to investigate in a population, be
it the outcome of competition with another species, the impact of a
2017-18BIOLOGY
predator or the effect of a pesticide application, we always evaluate them
in terms of any change in the population size. The size, in nature, could
be as low as <10 (Siberian cranes at Bharatpur wetlands in any year) or
go into millions (Chlamydomonas in a pond). Population size, more
technically called population density (designated as N), need not
necessarily be measured in numbers only. Although total number is
generally the most appropriate measure of population density, it is in
some cases either meaningless or difficult to determine. In an area, if
there are 200 Parthenium plants but only a single huge banyan tree with
a large canopy, stating that the population density of banyan is low relative
to that of Parthenium amounts to underestimating the enormous role of
the Banyan in that community. In such cases, the per cent cover or biomass
is a more meaningful measure of the population size. Total number is
again not an easily adoptable measure if the population is huge and
counting is impossible or very time-consuming. If you have a dense
laboratory culture of bacteria in a petri dish what is the best measure to
report its density? Sometimes, for certain ecological investigations, there
is no need to know the absolute population densities; relative densities
serve the purpose equally well. For instance, the number of fish caught
per trap is good enough measure of its total population density in the lake.
We are mostly obliged to estimate population sizes indirectly, without
actually counting them or seeing them. The tiger census in our national
parks and tiger reserves is often based on pug marks and fecal pellets.
13.2.2 Population Growth
228
The size of a population for any species is not a static parameter. It keeps
changing in time, depending on various factors including food availability,
predation pressure and adverse weather. In fact, it is these changes in
population density that give us some idea of what is happening to the
population – whether it is flourishing or declining. Whatever might be
the ultimate reasons, the density of a population in a given habitat during
a given period, fluctuates due to changes in four basic processes, two of
which (natality and immigration) contribute to an increase in population
density and two (mortality and emigration) to a decrease.
(i) Natality refers to the number of births during a given period in the
population that are added to the initial density.
(ii) Mortality is the number of deaths in the population during a given
period.
(iii) Immigration is the number of individuals of the same species that
have come into the habitat from elsewhere during the time period
under consideration.
(iv) Emigration is the number of individuals of the population who
left the habitat and gone elsewhere during the time period under
consideration.
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
So, if N is the population density at time t, then its density at time t +1 is
N t+1 = N t + [(B + I) – (D + E)]
You can see from the above equation that population density will
increase if the number of births plus the number of immigrants (B + I) is
more than the number of deaths plus the number of emigrants (D + E),
otherwise it will decrease. Under normal conditions, births and deaths
are the most important factors influencing population density, the other
two factors assuming importance only under special conditions. For
instance, if a new habitat is just being colonised, immigration may
contribute more significantly to population growth than birth rates.
Growth Models : Does the growth of a population with time show any
specific and predictable pattern? We have been concerned about unbridled
human population growth and problems created by it in our country
and it is therefore natural for us to be curious if different animal
populations in nature behave the same way or show some restraints on
growth. Perhaps we can learn a lesson or two from nature on how to
control population growth.
(i) Exponential growth : Resource (food and space) availability is
obviously essential for the unimpeded growth of a population.
Ideally, when resources in the habitat are unlimited, each species
has the ability to realise fully its innate potential to grow in number,
as Darwin observed while developing his theory of natural selection.
Then the population grows in an exponential or geometric fashion.
If in a population of size N, the birth rates (not total number but
229
2017-18BIOLOGY
per capita births) are represented as b and death rates (again, per
capita death rates) as d, then the increase or decrease in N during a
unit time period t (dN/dt) will be
dN/dt = (b – d) × N
Let (b–d) = r, then
dN/dt = rN
The r in this equation is called the ‘intrinsic rate of natural increase’
and is a very important parameter chosen for assessing impacts of
any biotic or abiotic factor on population growth.
To give you some idea about the magnitude of r values, for the
Norway rat the r is 0.015, and for the flour beetle it is 0.12. In
1981, the r value for human population in India was 0.0205. Find
out what the current r value is. For calculating it, you need to
know the birth rates and death rates.
The above equation describes the exponential or geometric growth
pattern of a population (Figure 13.5) and results in a J-shaped curve
when we plot N in relation to time. If you are familiar with basic
calculus, you can derive the integral form of the
exponential growth equation as
N t = N 0 e rt
where
N t = Population density after time t
N 0 = Population density at time zero
r = intrinsic rate of natural increase
e = the base of natural logarithms (2.71828)
Figure 13.5 Population growth curve
a when responses are not
limiting the growth, plot is
exponential,
b when responses are limiting
the growth, plot is logistic,
K is carrying capacity
230
Any species growing exponentially under unlimited
resource conditions can reach enormous population
densities in a short time. Darwin showed how even
a slow growing animal like elephant could reach
enormous numbers in the absence of checks. The
following is an anecdote popularly narrated to
demonstrate dramatically how fast a huge
population could build up when growing
exponentially.
The king and the minister sat for a chess game. The king, confident
of winning the game, was ready to accept any bet proposed by the
minister. The minister humbly said that if he won, he wanted only
some wheat grains, the quantity of which is to be calculated by placing
on the chess board one grain in Square 1, then two in Square 2,
then four in Square 3, and eight in Square 4, and so on, doubling each
time the previous quantity of wheat on the next square until all the 64
squares were filled. The king accepted the seemingly silly bet and started
the game, but unluckily for him, the minister won. The king felt that fulfilling
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
the minister’s bet was so easy. He started with a single grain on
the first square and proceeded to fill the other squares following
minister’s suggested procedure, but by the time he covered half the
chess board, the king realised to his dismay that all the wheat
produced in his entire kingdom pooled together would still be
inadequate to cover all the 64 squares. Now think of a tiny
Paramecium starting with just one individual and through binary
fission, doubling in numbers every day, and imagine what a mind-
boggling population size it would reach in 64 days. (provided food
and space remain unlimited)
(ii) Logistic growth: No population of any species in nature has at its
disposal unlimited resources to permit exponential growth. This
leads to competition between individuals for limited resources.
Eventually, the ‘fittest’ individual will survive and reproduce. The
governments of many countries have also realised this fact and
introduced various restraints with a view to limit human population
growth. In nature, a given habitat has enough resources to support
a maximum possible number, beyond which no further growth is
possible. Let us call this limit as nature’s carrying capacity (K) for
that species in that habitat.
A population growing in a habitat with limited resources show
initially a lag phase, followed by phases of acceleration and
deceleration and finally an asymptote, when the population density
reaches the carrying capacity. A plot of N in relation to time (t)
results in a sigmoid curve. This type of population growth is called
Verhulst-Pearl Logistic Growth (Figure 13.5) and is described by
the following equation:
 K − N 
dN/dt = rN 

 K 
Where
N = Population density at time t
r = Intrinsic rate of natural increase
K = Carrying capacity
Since resources for growth for most animal populations are finite
and become limiting sooner or later, the logistic growth model is
considered a more realistic one.
Gather from Government Census data the population figures
for India for the last 100 years, plot them and check which growth
pattern is evident.
231
13.2.3 Life History Variation
Populations evolve to maximise their reproductive fitness, also called
Darwinian fitness (high r value), in the habitat in which they live. Under
a particular set of selection pressures, organisms evolve towards the most
2017-18BIOLOGY
efficient reproductive strategy. Some organisms breed only once in their
lifetime (Pacific salmon fish, bamboo) while others breed many times
during their lifetime (most birds and mammals). Some produce a large
number of small-sized offspring (Oysters, pelagic fishes) while others
produce a small number of large-sized offspring (birds, mammals). So,
which is desirable for maximising fitness? Ecologists suggest that life
history traits of organisms have evolved in relation to the constraints
imposed by the abiotic and biotic components of the habitat in which
they live. Evolution of life history traits in different species is currently an
important area of research being conducted by ecologists.
13.2.4 Population Interactions
Can you think of any natural habitat on earth that is inhabited just by a
single species? There is no such habitat and such a situation is even
inconceivable. For any species, the minimal requirement is one more
species on which it can feed. Even a plant species, which makes its own
food, cannot survive alone; it needs soil microbes to break down the organic
matter in soil and return the inorganic nutrients for absorption. And then,
how will the plant manage pollination without an animal agent? It is
obvious that in nature, animals, plants and microbes do not and cannot
live in isolation but interact in various ways to form a biological
community. Even in minimal communities, many interactive linkages
exist, although all may not be readily apparent.
Interspecific interactions arise from the interaction of populations of
two different species. They could be beneficial, detrimental or neutral
(neither harm nor benefit) to one of the species or both. Assigning a ‘+’
sign for beneficial interaction, ‘-’ sign for detrimental and 0 for neutral
interaction, let us look at all the possible outcomes of interspecific
interactions (Table13.1).
Table 13.1 : Population Interactions
232
Species A Species B Name of Interaction
+ + Mutualism
– – Competition
+ – Predation
+ – Parasitism
+ 0 Commensalism
– 0 Amensalism
Both the species benefit in mutualism and both lose in competition in
their interactions with each other. In both parasitism and predation only
one species benefits (parasite and predator, respectively) and the interaction
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
is detrimental to the other species (host and prey, respectively).
The interaction where one species is benefitted and the other is neither
benefitted nor harmed is called commensalism. In amensalism on
the other hand one species is harmed whereas the other is
unaffected. Predation, parasitism and commensalism share a common
characteristic– the interacting species live closely together.
(i) Predation: What would happen to all the energy fixed by
autotrophic organisms if the community has no animals to eat the
plants? You can think of predation as nature’s way of transferring
to higher trophic levels the energy fixed by plants. When we think
of predator and prey, most probably it is the tiger and the deer that
readily come to our mind, but a sparrow eating any seed is no less
a predator. Although animals eating plants are categorised
separately as herbivores, they are, in a broad ecological context,
not very different from predators.
Besides acting as ‘conduits’ for energy transfer across trophic
levels, predators play other important roles. They keep prey
populations under control. But for predators, prey species could
achieve very high population densities and cause ecosystem
instability. When certain exotic species are introduced into a
geographical area, they become invasive and start spreading fast
because the invaded land does not have its natural predators. The
prickly pear cactus introduced into Australia in the early 1920’s
caused havoc by spreading rapidly into millions of hectares of
rangeland. Finally, the invasive cactus was brought under control
only after a cactus-feeding predator (a moth) from its natural habitat
was introduced into the country. Biological control methods adopted
in agricultural pest control are based on the ability of the predator
to regulate prey population. Predators also help in maintaining
species diversity in a community, by reducing the intensity of
competition among competing prey species. In the rocky intertidal
communities of the American Pacific Coast the starfish Pisaster is
an important predator. In a field experiment, when all the starfish
were removed from an enclosed intertidal area, more than 10 species
of invertebrates became extinct within a year, because of inter-
specific competition.
If a predator is too efficient and overexploits its prey, then the
prey might become extinct and following it, the predator will also
become extinct for lack of food. This is the reason why predators in
nature are ‘prudent’. Prey species have evolved various defenses to
lessen the impact of predation. Some species of insects and frogs
are cryptically-coloured (camouflaged) to avoid being detected easily
by the predator. Some are poisonous and therefore avoided by the
233
2017-18BIOLOGY
234
predators. The Monarch butterfly is highly distasteful to its predator
(bird) because of a special chemical present in its body.
Interestingly, the butterfly acquires this chemical during its
caterpillar stage by feeding on a poisonous weed.
For plants, herbivores are the predators. Nearly 25 per cent of
all insects are known to be phytophagous (feeding on plant sap
and other parts of plants). The problem is particularly severe for
plants because, unlike animals, they cannot run away from their
predators. Plants therefore have evolved an astonishing variety of
morphological and chemical defences against herbivores. Thorns
(Acacia, Cactus) are the most common morphological means of
defence. Many plants produce and store chemicals that make the
herbivore sick when they are eaten, inhibit feeding or digestion,
disrupt its reproduction or even kill it. You must have seen the
weed Calotropis growing in abandoned fields. The plant produces
highly poisonous cardiac glycosides and that is why you never see
any cattle or goats browsing on this plant. A wide variety of chemical
substances that we extract from plants on a commercial scale
(nicotine, caffeine, quinine, strychnine, opium, etc.,) are produced
by them actually as defences against grazers and browsers.
(ii) Competition: When Darwin spoke of the struggle for existence and
survival of the fittest in nature, he was convinced that interspecific
competition is a potent force in organic evolution. It is generally
believed that competition occurs when closely related species
compete for the same resources that are limiting, but this is not
entirely true. Firstly, totally unrelated species could also compete
for the same resource. For instance, in some shallow South
American lakes visiting flamingoes and resident fishes compete for
their common food, the zooplankton in the lake. Secondly,
resources need not be limiting for competition to occur; in
interference competition, the feeding efficiency of one species might
be reduced due to the interfering and inhibitory presence of the
other species, even if resources (food and space) are abundant.
Therefore, competition is best defined as a process in which the
fitness of one species (measured in terms of its ‘r’ the intrinsic rate
of increase) is significantly lower in the presence of another species.
It is relatively easy to demonstrate in laboratory experiments, as
Gause and other experimental ecologists did, when resources are
limited the competitively superior species will eventually eliminate
the other species, but evidence for such competitive exclusion
occurring in nature is not always conclusive. Strong and persuasive
circumstantial evidence does exist however in some cases. The
Abingdon tortoise in Galapagos Islands became extinct within a
decade after goats were introduced on the island, apparently due
to the greater browsing efficiency of the goats. Another evidence for
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
the occurrence of competition in nature comes from what is called
‘competitive release’. A species whose distribution is restricted to a
small geographical area because of the presence of a competitively
superior species, is found to expand its distributional range
dramatically when the competing species is experimentally removed.
Connell’s elegant field experiments showed that on the rocky sea
coasts of Scotland, the larger and competitively superior barnacle
Balanus dominates the intertidal area, and excludes the smaller
barnacle Chathamalus from that zone. In general, herbivores and
plants appear to be more adversely affected by competition than
carnivores.
Gause’s ‘Competitive Exclusion Principle’ states that two
closely related species competing for the same resources cannot
co-exist indefinitely and the competitively inferior one will be
eliminated eventually. This may be true if resources are limiting,
but not otherwise. More recent studies do not support such gross
generalisations about competition. While they do not rule out the
occurrence of interspecific competition in nature, they point out
that species facing competition might evolve mechanisms that
promote co-existence rather than exclusion. One such mechanism
is ‘resource partitioning’. If two species compete for the same
resource, they could avoid competition by choosing, for instance,
different times for feeding or different foraging patterns. MacArthur
showed that five closely related species of warblers living on the
same tree were able to avoid competition and co-exist due to
behavioural differences in their foraging activities.
(iii) Parasitism: Considering that the parasitic mode of life ensures
free lodging and meals, it is not surprising that parasitism has
evolved in so many taxonomic groups from plants to higher
vertebrates. Many parasites have evolved to be host-specific (they
can parasitise only a single species of host) in such a way that both
host and the parasite tend to co-evolve; that is, if the host evolves
special mechanisms for rejecting or resisting the parasite, the
parasite has to evolve mechanisms to counteract and neutralise
them, in order to be successful with the same host species. In
accordance with their life styles, parasites evolved special
adaptations such as the loss of unnecessary sense organs, presence
of adhesive organs or suckers to cling on to the host, loss of digestive
system and high reproductive capacity. The life cycles of parasites
are often complex, involving one or two intermediate hosts or vectors
to facilitate parasitisation of its primary host. The human liver fluke
(a trematode parasite) depends on two intermediate hosts (a snail
and a fish) to complete its life cycle. The malarial parasite needs a
235
2017-18BIOLOGY
236
vector (mosquito) to spread to other hosts. Majority of the parasites
harm the host; they may reduce the survival, growth and
reproduction of the host and reduce its population density. They
might render the host more vulnerable to predation by making it
physically weak. Do you believe that an ideal parasite should be
able to thrive within the host without harming it? Then why didn’t
natural selection lead to the evolution of such totally harmless
parasites?
Parasites that feed on the external surface of the host organism
are called ectoparasites. The most familiar examples of this group
are the lice on humans and ticks on dogs. Many marine fish are
infested with ectoparasitic copepods. Cuscuta, a parasitic plant that
is commonly found growing on hedge plants, has lost its chlorophyll
and leaves in the course of evolution. It derives its nutrition from
the host plant which it parasitises. The female mosquito is not
considered a parasite, although it needs our blood for reproduction.
Can you explain why?
In contrast, endoparasites are those that live inside the host
body at different sites (liver, kidney, lungs, red blood cells, etc.).
The life cycles of endoparasites are more complex because of their
extreme specialisation. Their morphological and anatomical features
are greatly simplified while emphasising their reproductive potential.
Brood parasitism in birds is a fascinating example of parasitism
in which the parasitic bird lays its eggs in the nest of its host and
lets the host incubate them. During the course of evolution, the
eggs of the parasitic bird have evolved to resemble the host’s egg in
size and colour to reduce the chances of the host bird detecting the
foreign eggs and ejecting them from the nest. Try to follow the
movements of the cuckoo (koel) and the crow in your neighborhood
park during the breeding season (spring to summer) and watch
brood parasitism in action.
(iv) Commensalism: This is the interaction in which one species benefits
and the other is neither harmed nor benefited. An orchid growing
as an epiphyte on a mango branch, and barnacles growing on the
back of a whale benefit while neither the mango tree nor the whale
derives any apparent benefit. The cattle egret and grazing cattle in
close association, a sight you are most likely to catch if you live in
farmed rural areas, is a classic example of commensalism. The
egrets always forage close to where the cattle are grazing because
the cattle, as they move, stir up and flush out from the vegetation
insects that otherwise might be difficult for the egrets to find and
catch. Another example of commensalism is the interaction between
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
(a)
Figure 13.6
(b)
Mutual relationship between fig tree and wasp: (a) Fig flower is pollinated
by wasp; (b) Wasp laying eggs in a fig fruit
sea anemone that has stinging tentacles and the clown fish that
lives among them. The fish gets protection from predators which
stay away from the stinging tentacles. The anemone does not appear
to derive any benefit by hosting the clown fish.
(v) Mutualism: This interaction confers benefits on both the interacting
species. Lichens represent an intimate mutualistic relationship
between a fungus and photosynthesising algae or cyanobacteria.
Similarly, the mycorrhizae are associations between fungi and the
roots of higher plants. The fungi help the plant in the absorption of
essential nutrients from the soil while the plant in turn provides the
fungi with energy-yielding carbohydrates.
The most spectacular and evolutionarily fascinating examples
of mutualism are found in plant-animal relationships. Plants need
the help of animals for pollinating their flowers and dispersing their
seeds. Animals obviously have to be paid ‘fees’ for the services that
plants expect from them. Plants offer rewards or fees in the form of
pollen and nectar for pollinators and juicy and nutritious fruits for
seed dispersers. But the mutually beneficial system should also
be safeguarded against ‘cheaters’, for example, animals that try to
steal nectar without aiding in pollination. Now you can see why
plant-animal interactions often involve co-evolution of the
mutualists, that is, the evolutions of the flower and its pollinator
species are tightly linked with one another. In many species of fig
trees, there is a tight one-to-one relationship with the pollinator
species of wasp (Figure 13.6). It means that a given fig species can
be pollinated only by its ‘partner’ wasp species and no other species.
The female wasp uses the fruit not only as an oviposition (egg-laying)
site but uses the developing seeds within the fruit for nourishing
237
2017-18BIOLOGY
its larvae. The wasp pollinates the fig inflorescence while
searching for suitable egg-laying sites. In return for the
favour of pollination the fig offers the wasp some of its
developing seeds, as food for the developing wasp larvae.
Orchids show a bewildering diversity of floral
patterns many of which have evolved to attract the right
pollinator insect (bees and bumblebees) and ensure
guaranteed pollination by it (Figure 13.7). Not all
orchids offer rewards. The Mediterranean orchid
Ophrys employs ‘sexual deceit’ to get pollination done
by a species of bee. One petal of its flower bears an
uncanny resemblance to the female of the bee in size,
colour and markings. The male bee is attracted to what
it perceives as a female, ‘pseudocopulates’ with the
flower, and during that process is dusted with pollen
from the flower. When this same bee ‘pseudocopulates’
Figure 13.7 Showing bee-a pollinator
on orchid flower
with another flower, it transfers pollen to it and thus,
pollinates the flower. Here you can see how co-evolution
operates. If the female bee’s colour patterns change even slightly for any
reason during evolution, pollination success will be reduced unless the
orchid flower co-evolves to maintain the resemblance of its petal to the
female bee.
SUMMARY
238
As a branch of biology, Ecology is the study of the relationships of
living organisms with the abiotic (physico-chemical factors) and biotic
components (other species) of their environment. It is concerned
with four levels of biological organisation-organisms, populations,
communities and biomes.
Temperature, light, water and soil are the most important
physical factors of the environment to which the organisms are
adapted in various ways. Maintenance of a constant internal
environment (homeostasis) by the organisms contributes to optimal
performance, but only some organisms (regulators) are capable of
homeostasis in the face of changing external environment. Others
either partially regulate their internal environment or simply
conform. A few other species have evolved adaptations to avoid
unfavourable conditions in space (migration) or in time (aestivation,
hibernation, and diapause).
Evolutionary changes through natural selection take place at
the population level and hence, population ecology is an important
area of ecology. A population is a group of individuals of a given
species sharing or competing for similar resources in a defined
geographical area. Populations have attributes that individual
organisms do not- birth rates and death rates, sex ratio and age
2017-18ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
distribution. The proportion of different age groups of males and
females in a population is often presented graphically as age pyramid;
its shape indicates whether a population is stationary, growing or
declining.
Ecological effects of any factors on a population are generally
reflected in its size (population density), which may be expressed in
different ways (numbers, biomass, per cent cover, etc.,) depending
on the species.
Populations grow through births and immigration and decline
through deaths and emigration. When resources are unlimited, the
growth is usually exponential but when resources become
progressively limiting, the growth pattern turns logistic. In either
case, growth is ultimately limited by the carrying capacity of the
environment. The intrinsic rate of natural increase (r) is a measure
of the inherent potential of a population to grow.
In nature populations of different species in a habitat do not live
in isolation but interact in many ways. Depending on the outcome,
these interactions between two species are classified as competition
(both species suffer), predation and parasitism (one benefits and the
other suffers), commensalism (one benefits and the other is
unaffected), amensalism (one is harmed, other unaffected) and
mutualism (both species benefit). Predation is a very important
process through which trophic energy transfer is facilitated and some
predators help in controlling their prey populations. Plants have
evolved diverse morphological and chemical defenses against
herbivory. In competition, it is presumed that the superior competitor
eliminates the inferior one (the Competitive Exclusion Principle), but
many closely related species have evolved various mechanisms which
facilitate their co-existence. Some of the most fascinating cases of
mutualism in nature are seen in plant-pollinator interactions.
EXERCISES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
How is diapause different from hibernation?
If a marine fish is placed in a fresh water aquarium, will the fish be
able to survive? Why or why not?
Define phenotypic adaptation. Give one example.
Most living organisms cannot survive at temperature above 45 0 C. How
are some microbes able to live in habitats with temperatures exceeding
100 0 C?
List the attributes that populations but not individuals possess.
If a population growing exponentially double in size in 3 years, what is
the intrinsic rate of increase (r) of the population?
Name important defence mechanisms in plants against herbivory.
239
2017-18BIOLOGY
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
An orchid plant is growing on the branch of mango tree. How do you
describe this interaction between the orchid and the mango tree?
What is the ecological principle behind the biological control method of
managing with pest insects?
Distinguish between the following:
(a) Hibernation and Aestivation
(b) Ectotherms and Endotherms
Write a short note on
(a) Adaptations of desert plants and animals
(b) Adaptations of plants to water scarcity
(c) Behavioural adaptations in animals
(d) Importance of light to plants
(e) Effect of temperature or water scarcity and the adaptations of animals.
List the various abiotic environmental factors.
Give an example for:
(a) An endothermic animal
(b) An ectothermic animal
(c) An organism of benthic zone
Define population and community.
Define the following terms and give one example for each:
(a) Commensalism
(b) Parasitism
(c) Camouflage
(d) Mutualism
(e) Interspecific competition
With the help of suitable diagram describe the logistic population
growth curve.
Select the statement which explains best parasitism.
(a) One organism is benefited.
(b) Both the organisms are benefited.
(c) One organism is benefited, other is not affected.
(d) One organism is benefited, other is affected.
List any three important characteristics of a population and explain.
240
2017-18
CHAPTER 14
ECOSYSTEM
14.1 Ecosystem–Structure
and Function
14.2. Productivity
14.3 Decomposition
14.4 Energy Flow
14.5 Ecological Pyramids
14.6 Ecological Succession
14.7 Nutrient Cycling
14.8 Ecosystem Services
An ecosystem can be visualised as a functional unit of
nature, where living organisms interact among themselves
and also with the surrounding physical environment.
Ecosystem varies greatly in size from a small pond to a
large forest or a sea. Many ecologists regard the entire
biosphere as a global ecosystem, as a composite of all
local ecosystems on Earth. Since this system is too much
big and complex to be studied at one time, it is convenient
to divide it into two basic categories, namely the
terrestrial and the aquatic. Forest, grassland and desert
are some examples of terrestrial ecosystems; pond, lake,
wetland, river and estuary are some examples of aquatic
ecosystems. Crop fields and an aquarium may also be
considered as man-made ecosystems.
We will first look at the structure of the ecosystem, in
order to appreciate the input (productivity), transfer of
energy (food chain/web, nutrient cycling) and the output
(degradation and energy loss). We will also look at the
relationships – cycles, chains, webs – that are created as
a result of these energy flows within the system and their
inter- relationship.
2017-18BIOLOGY
14.1 E COSYSTEM – S TRUCTURE
242
AND
F UNCTION
In chapter 13, you have looked at the various components of the
environment- abiotic and biotic. You studied how the individual biotic
and abiotic factors affected each other and their surrounding. Let us look
at these components in a more integrated manner and see how the flow of
energy takes place within these components of the ecosystem.
Interaction of biotic and abiotic components result in a physical
structure that is characteristic for each type of ecosystem. Identification
and enumeration of plant and animal species of an ecosystem gives its
species composition. Vertical distribution of different species occupying
different levels is called stratification. For example, trees occupy top
vertical strata or layer of a forest, shrubs the second and herbs and grasses
occupy the bottom layers.
The components of the ecosystem are seen to function as a unit when
you consider the following aspects:
(i) Productivity;
(ii) Decomposition;
(iii) Energy flow; and
(iv) Nutrient cycling.
To understand the ethos of an aquatic ecosystem let us take a small
pond as an example. This is fairly a self-sustainable unit and rather simple
example that explain even the complex interactions that exist in an aquatic
ecosystem. A pond is a shallow water body in which all the above
mentioned four basic components of an ecosystem are well exhibited.
The abiotic component is the water with all the dissolved inorganic and
organic substances and the rich soil deposit at the bottom of the pond.
The solar input, the cycle of temperature, day-length and other climatic
conditions regulate the rate of function of the entire pond. The autotrophic
components include the phytoplankton, some algae and the floating,
submerged and marginal plants found at the edges. The consumers are
represented by the zooplankton, the free swimming and bottom dwelling
forms. The decomposers are the fungi, bacteria and flagellates especially
abundant in the bottom of the pond. This system performs all the functions
of any ecosystem and of the biosphere as a whole, i.e., conversion of
inorganic into organic material with the help of the radiant energy of the
sun by the autotrophs; consumption of the autotrophs by heterotrophs;
decomposition and mineralisation of the dead matter to release them back
for reuse by the autotrophs, these event are repeated over and over again.
There is unidirectional movement of energy towards the higher trophic
levels and its dissipation and loss as heat to the environment.
14.2. P RODUCTIVITY
A constant input of solar energy is the basic requirement for any ecosystem
to function and sustain. Primary production is defined as the amount of
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
biomass or organic matter produced per unit area over a time period by
plants during photosynthesis. It is expressed in terms of weight (g – 2 ) or
energy (kcal m – 2 ). The rate of biomass production is called productivity.
It is expressed in terms of gm –2 yr –1 or (kcal m – 2 ) yr –1 to compare the
productivity of different ecosystems. It can be divided into gross primary
productivity (GPP) and net primary productivity (NPP). Gross primary
productivity of an ecosystem is the rate of production of organic matter
during photosynthesis. A considerable amount of GPP is utilised by plants
in respiration. Gross primary productivity minus respiration losses (R),
is the net primary productivity (NPP).
GPP – R = NPP
Net primary productivity is the available biomass for the consumption
to heterotrophs (herbiviores and decomposers). Secondary productivity
is defined as the rate of formation of new organic matter by
consumers.
Primary productivity depends on the plant species inhabiting a
particular area. It also depends on a variety of environmental factors,
availability of nutrients and photosynthetic capacity of plants. Therefore,
it varies in different types of ecosystems. The annual net primary
productivity of the whole biosphere is approximately 170 billion tons
(dry weight) of organic matter. Of this, despite occupying about 70 per
cent of the surface, the productivity of the oceans are only 55 billion tons.
Rest of course, is on land. Discuss the main reason for the low
productivity of ocean with your teacher.
14.3 D ECOMPOSITION
You may have heard of the earthworm being referred to as the farmer’s
‘friend’. This is so because they help in the breakdown of complex organic
matter as well as in loosening of the soil. Similarly, decomposers break
down complex organic matter into inorganic substances like carbon
dioxide, water and nutrients and the process is called decomposition.
Dead plant remains such as leaves, bark, flowers and dead remains of
animals, including fecal matter, constitute detritus, which is the raw
material for decomposition. The important steps in the process of
decomposition are fragmentation, leaching, catabolism, humification and
mineralisation.
Detritivores (e.g., earthworm) break down detritus into smaller particles.
This process is called fragmentation. By the process of leaching, water-
soluble inorganic nutrients go down into the soil horizon and get precipitated
as unavailable salts. Bacterial and fungal enzymes degrade detritus into
simpler inorganic substances. This process is called as catabolism.
It is important to note that all the above steps in decomposition operate
simultaneously on the detritus (Figure 14.1). Humification and
mineralisation occur during decomposition in the soil. Humification leads
243
2017-18BIOLOGY
Figure 14.1 Diagrammatic representation of decomposition cycle in a terrestrial ecosystem
244
to accumulation of a dark coloured amorphous substance called humus
that is highly resistant to microbial action and undergoes decomposition
at an extremely slow rate. Being colloidal in nature it serves as a reservoir
of nutrients. The humus is further degraded by some microbes and release
of inorganic nutrients occur by the process known as mineralisation.
Decomposition is largely an oxygen-requiring process. The rate of
decomposition is controlled by chemical composition of detritus and
climatic factors. In a particular climatic condition, decomposition rate
is slower if detritus is rich in lignin and chitin, and quicker, if detritus is
rich in nitrogen and water-soluble substances like sugars. Temperature
and soil moisture are the most important climatic factors that regulate
decomposition through their effects on the activities of soil microbes.
Warm and moist environment favour decomposition whereas low
temperature and anaerobiosis inhibit decomposition resulting in build
up of organic materials.
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
14.4 E NERGY F LOW
Except for the deep sea hydro-thermal ecosystem, sun is the only source
of energy for all ecosystems on Earth. Of the incident solar radiation less
than 50 per cent of it is photosynthetically active radiation (PAR). We
know that plants and photosynthetic bacteria (autotrophs), fix suns’
radiant energy to make food from simple inorganic materials. Plants
capture only 2-10 per cent of the PAR and this small amount of energy
sustains the entire living world. So, it is very important to know how the
solar energy captured by plants flows through different organisms of an
ecosystem. All organisms are dependent for their food on producers, either
directly or indirectly. So you find unidirectional flow of energy from the
sun to producers and then to consumers. Is this in keeping with the first
law of thermodynamics?
Further, ecosystems are not exempt from the Second Law of
thermodynamics. They need a constant supply of energy to synthesise
the molecules they require, to counteract the universal tendency toward
increasing disorderliness.
The green plant in the ecosystem-terminology are called producers.
In a terrestrial ecosystem, major producers are herbaceous and woody
plants. Likewise, primary producers in an aquatic ecosystem are various
species like phytoplankton, algae and higher plants.
You have read about the food chains and webs that exist in nature.
Starting from the plants (or producers) food chains or rather webs are
formed such that an animal feeds on a plant or on another animal and in
turn is food for another. The chain or web is formed because of this
interdependency. No energy that is trapped into an organism remains in
it for ever. The energy trapped by the producer, hence, is either passed on
to a consumer or the organism dies. Death of organism is the beginning
of the detritus food chain/web.
All animals depend on plants (directly or indirectly) for their food needs.
They are hence called consumers and also heterotrophs. If they feed on
the producers, the plants, they are called primary consumers, and if the
animals eat other animals which in turn eat the plants (or their produce)
they are called secondary consumers. Likewise, you could have tertiary
consumers too. Obviously the primary consumers will be herbivores.
Some common herbivores are insects, birds and mammals in terrestrial
ecosystem and molluscs in aquatic ecosystem.
The consumers that feed on these herbivores are carnivores, or more
correctly primary carnivores (though secondary consumers). Those
animals that depend on the primary carnivores for food are labelled
secondary carnivores. A simple grazing food chain (GFC) is depicted
below:
Grass
(Producer)
Goat Man
(Primary Consumer) (Secondary consumer)
245
2017-18BIOLOGY
The detritus food chain (DFC) begins with dead organic matter. It is
made up of decomposers which are heterotrophic organisms, mainly
fungi and bacteria. They meet their energy and nutrient requirements by
degrading dead organic matter or detritus. These are also known as
saprotrophs (sapro: to decompose). Decomposers secrete digestive
enzymes that breakdown dead and waste materials into simple, inorganic
materials, which are subsequently absorbed by them.
In an aquatic ecosystem, GFC is the major conduit for energy flow.
As against this, in a terrestrial ecosystem, a much larger fraction of energy
flows through the detritus food chain than through the GFC. Detritus
food chain may be connected with the grazing food chain at some levels:
some of the organisms of DFC are prey to the GFC animals, and in a natural
ecosystem, some animals like cockroaches, crows, etc., are omnivores.
These natural interconnection of food chains make it a food web. How
would you classify human beings!
Organisms occupy a place in the natural surroundings or in a
community according to their feeding relationship with other organisms.
Based on the source of their nutrition or food, organisms occupy a specific
place in the food chain that is known as their trophic level. Producers
belong to the first trophic level, herbivores (primary consumer) to the
second and carnivores (secondary consumer) to the third (Figure 14.2).
246
Figure 14.2 Diagrammatic representation of trophic levels in an ecosystem
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
The important point to note is that the amount of energy decreases at
successive trophic levels. When any organism dies it is converted to
detritus or dead biomass that serves as an energy source for decomposers.
Organisms at each trophic level depend on those at the lower trophic level
for their energy demands.
Each trophic level has a certain mass of living material at a particular
time called as the standing crop. The standing crop is measured as the
mass of living organisms (biomass) or the number in a unit area. The
biomass of a species is expressed in terms of fresh or dry weight.
Measurement of biomass in terms of dry weight is more accurate. Why?
The number of trophic levels in the grazing food chain is restricted as
the transfer of energy follows 10 per cent law – only 10 per cent of the
energy is transferred to each trophic level from the lower trophic level. In
nature, it is possible to have so many levels – producer, herbivore, primary
carnivore, secondary carnivore in the grazing food chain (Figure 14.3) .
Do you think there is any such limitation in a detritus food chain?
Figure 14.3 Energy flow through different trophic levels
247
14.5 E COLOGICAL P YRAMIDS
You must be familiar with the shape of a pyramid. The base of a pyramid
is broad and it narrows down at the apex. One gets a similar shape,
whether you express the food or energy relationship between organisms
2017-18BIOLOGY
at different trophic level. Thus, relationship is expressed in terms of
number, biomass or energy. The base of each pyramid represents the
producers or the first trophic level while the apex represents tertiary or
top level consumer. The three ecological pyramids that are usually studied
are (a) pyramid of number; (b) pyramid of biomass and (c) pyramid of
energy. For detail (see Figure 14.4 a, b, c and d).
Figure 14.4 (a) Pyramid of numbers in a grassland ecosystem. Only three top-carnivores are
supported in an ecosystem based on production of nearly 6 millions plants
Figure 14.4 (b) Pyramid of biomass shows a sharp decrease in biomass at higher trophic levels
248
Figure 14.4 (c) Inverted pyramid of biomass-small standing crop of phytoplankton supports large
standing crop of zooplankton
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
Figure 14.4 (d) An ideal pyramid of energy. Observe that primary producers convert only 1% of
the energy in the sunlight available to them into NPP
Any calculations of energy content, biomass, or numbers has to
include all organisms at that trophic level. No generalisations we make
will be true if we take only a few individuals at any trophic level into
account. Also a given organism may occupy more than one trophic level
simultaneously. One must remember that the trophic level represents a
functional level, not a species as such. A given species may occupy more
than one trophic level in the same ecosystem at the same time; for example,
a sparrow is a primary consumer when it eats seeds, fruits, peas, and a
secondary consumer when it eats insects and worms. Can you work out
how many trophic levels human beings function at in a food chain?
In most ecosystems, all the pyramids, of number, of energy and
biomass are upright, i.e., producers are more in number and biomass
than the herbivores, and herbivores are more in number and biomass
than the carnivores. Also energy at a lower trophic level is always more
than at a higher level.
There are exceptions to this generalisation: If you were to count the
number of insects feeding on a big tree what kind of pyramid would you
get? Now add an estimate of the number of small birds depending on the
insects, as also the number of larger birds eating the smaller. Draw the
shape you would get.
The pyramid of biomass in sea is also generally inverted because the
biomass of fishes far exceeds that of phytoplankton. Isn’t that a paradox?
How would you explain this?
Pyramid of energy is always upright, can never be inverted, because
when energy flows from a particular trophic level to the next trophic level,
some energy is always lost as heat at each step. Each bar in the energy
pyramid indicates the amount of energy present at each trophic level in a
given time or annually per unit area.
249
2017-18BIOLOGY
However, there are certain limitations of ecological pyramids such as
it does not take into account the same species belonging to two or more
trophic levels. It assumes a simple food chain, something that almost
never exists in nature; it does not accommodate a food web. Moreover,
saprophytes are not given any place in ecological pyramids even though
they play a vital role in the ecosystem.
14.6 E COLOGICAL S UCCESSION
250
You have learnt in Chapter 13, the characteristics of population and
community and also their response to environment and how such
responses vary from an individual response. Let us examine another aspect
of community response to environment over time.
An important characteristic of all communities is that their
composition and structure constantly change in response to the changing
environmental conditions. This change is orderly and sequential, parallel
with the changes in the physical environment. These changes lead finally
to a community that is in near equilibrium with the environment and
that is called a climax community. The gradual and fairly predictable
change in the species composition of a given area is called ecological
succession. During succession some species colonise an area and their
populations become more numerous, whereas populations of other species
decline and even disappear.
The entire sequence of communities that successively change in a
given area are called sere(s). The individual transitional communities are
termed seral stages or seral communities. In the successive seral stages
there is a change in the diversity of species of organisms, increase in the
number of species and organisms as well as an increase in the total biomass.
The present day communities in the world have come to be because
of succession that has occurred over millions of years since life started on
earth. Actually succession and evolution would have been parallel
processes at that time.
Succession is hence a process that starts where no living organisms
are there – these could be areas where no living organisms ever existed,
say bare rock; or in areas that somehow, lost all the living organisms that
existed there. The former is called primary succession, while the latter is
termed secondary succession.
Examples of areas where primary succession occurs are newly cooled
lava, bare rock, newly created pond or reservoir. The establishment of a
new biotic community is generally slow. Before a biotic community of
diverse organisms can become established, there must be soil. Depending
mostly on the climate, it takes natural processes several hundred to several
thousand years to produce fertile soil on bare rock.
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
Secondary succession begins in areas where natural biotic
communities have been destroyed such as in abandoned farm lands,
burned or cut forests, lands that have been flooded. Since some soil or
sediment is present, succession is faster than primary succession.
Description of ecological succession usually focuses on changes in
vegetation. However, these vegetational changes in turn affect food and
shelter for various types of animals. Thus, as succession proceeds, the
numbers and types of animals and decomposers also change.
At any time during primary or secondary succession, natural or
human induced disturbances (fire, deforestation, etc.), can convert a
particular seral stage of succession to an earlier stage. Also such
disturbances create new conditions that encourage some species and
discourage or eliminate other species.
14.6.1 Succession of Plants
Based on the nature of the habitat – whether it is water (or very wet areas)
or it is on very dry areas – succession of plants is called hydrarch or
xerarch, respectively. Hydrarch succession takes place in wetter areas
and the successional series progress from hydric to the mesic conditions.
As against this, xerarch succession takes place in dry areas and the
series progress from xeric to mesic conditions. Hence, both hydrarch and
xerarch successions lead to medium water conditions (mesic) – neither
too dry (xeric) nor too wet (hydric).
The species that invade a bare area are called pioneer species. In
primary succession on rocks these are usually lichens which are able to
secrete acids to dissolve rock, helping in weathering and soil formation.
These later pave way to some very small plants like bryophytes, which
are able to take hold in the small amount of soil. They are, with time,
succeeded by bigger plants, and after several more stages, ultimately a
stable climax forest community is formed. The climax community remains
stable as long as the environment remains unchanged. With time the
xerophytic habitat gets converted into a mesophytic one.
In primary succession in water, the pioneers are the small
phytoplanktons, they are replaced with time by rooted-submerged plants,
rooted-floating angiosperms followed by free-floating plants, then reed-
swamp, marsh-meadow, scrub and finally the trees. The climax again would
be a forest. With time the water body is converted into land (Figure 14.5).
In secondary succession the species that invade depend on the
condition of the soil, availability of water, the environment as also the
seeds or other propagules present. Since soil is already there, the rate of
succession is much faster and hence, climax is also reached more quickly.
What is important to understand is that succession, particularly
primary succession, is a very slow process, taking maybe thousands of
251
2017-18BIOLOGY
(a) (d)
(b) (e)
(f)
(c)
252
(g)
Figure 14.5 Diagrammatic representation of primary succession
years for the climax to be reached. Another important fact is to understand
that all succession whether taking place in water or on land, proceeds to
a similar climax community – the mesic.
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
14.7 N UTRIENT C YCLING
You have studied in Class XI that organisms need a constant supply of
nutrients to grow, reproduce and regulate various body functions. The
amount of nutrients, such as carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, etc.,
present in the soil at any given time, is referred to as the standing state. It
varies in different kinds of ecosystems and also on a seasonal basis.
What is important is to appreciate that nutrients which are never lost
from the ecosystems, are recycled time and again indefinitely. The
movement of nutrient elements through the various components of an
ecosystem is called nutrient cycling. Another name of nutrient cycling
is biogeochemical cycles (bio: living organism, geo: rocks, air, water).
Nutrient cycles are of two types: (a) gaseous and (b) sedimentary. The
Figure 14.6 Simplified model of carbon cycle in the biosphere
253
reservoir for gaseous type of nutrient cycle (e.g., nitrogen, carbon cycle)
exists in the atmosphere and for the sedimentary cycle (e.g., sulphur and
phosphorus cycle), the reservoir is located in Earth’s crust. Environmental
factors, e.g., soil, moisture, pH, temperature, etc., regulate the rate of
release of nutrients into the atmosphere. The function of the reservoir is
2017-18BIOLOGY
to meet with the deficit which occurs due to imbalance in the rate of influx
and efflux.
You have made a detailed study of nitrogen cycle in class XI. Here we
discuss carbon and phosphorus cycles.
14.7.1 Ecosystem – Carbon Cycle
When you study the composition of living organisms, carbon constitutes
49 per cent of dry weight of organisms and is next only to water. If we
look at the total quantity of global carbon, we find that 71 per cent carbon
is found dissolved in oceans. This oceanic reservoir regulates the amount
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere (Figure 14.6). Do you know that the
atmosphere only contains about 1per cent of total global carbon?
Fossil fuel also represent a reservoir of carbon. Carbon cycling occurs
through atmosphere, ocean and through living and dead organisms.
According to one estimate 4 × 10 13 kg of carbon is fixed in the biosphere
through photosynthesis annually. A considerable amount of carbon
returns to the atmosphere as CO 2 through respiratory activities of the
producers and consumers. Decomposers also contribute substantially
to CO 2 pool by their processing of waste materials and dead organic matter
of land or oceans. Some amount of the fixed carbon is lost to sediments
and removed from circulation. Burning of wood, forest fire and combustion
of organic matter, fossil fuel, volcanic activity are additional sources for
releasing CO 2 in the atmosphere.
Human activities have significantly influenced the carbon cycle. Rapid
deforestation and massive burning of fossil fuel for energy and transport
have significantly increased the rate of release of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere (see greenhouse effect in Chapter 16).
14.7.2 Ecosystem – Phosphorus Cycle
254
Phosphorus is a major constituent of biological membranes, nucleic acids
and cellular energy transfer systems. Many animals also need large
quantities of this element to make shells, bones and teeth. The natural
reservoir of phosphorus is rock, which contains phosphorus in the form
of phosphates. When rocks are weathered, minute amounts of these
phosphates dissolve in soil solution and are absorbed by the roots of the
plants (Figure 14.7). Herbivores and other animals obtain this element
from plants. The waste products and the dead organisms are decomposed
by phosphate-solubilising bacteria releasing phosphorus. Unlike carbon
cycle, there is no respiratory release of phosphorus into atmosphere. Can
you differentiate between the carbon and the phosphorus cycle?
The other two major and important differences between carbon and
phosphorus cycle are firstly, atmospheric inputs of phosphorus through
rainfall are much smaller than carbon inputs, and, secondly, gaseous
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
Figure 14.7 A simplified model of phosphorus cycling in a terrestrial
ecosystem
exchanges of phosphorus between organism and environment are
negligible.
14.8 E COSYSTEM S ERVICES
Healthy ecosystems are the base for a wide range of economic,
environmental and aesthetic goods and services. The products of
ecosystem processes are named as ecosystem services, for example,
healthy forest ecosystems purify air and water, mitigate droughts and
floods, cycle nutrients, generate fertile soils, provide wildlife habitat,
maintain biodiversity, pollinate crops, provide storage site for carbon
and also provide aesthetic, cultural and spiritual values. Though value
of such services of biodiversity is difficult to determine, it seems
reasonable to think that biodiversity should carry a hefty price tag.
Robert Constanza and his colleagues have very recently tried to
put price tags on nature’s life-support services. Researchers have put
an average price tag of US $ 33 trillion a year on these fundamental
ecosystems services, which are largely taken for granted because they
are free. This is nearly twice the value of the global gross national
product GNP which is (US $ 18 trillion).
Out of the total cost of various ecosystem services, the soil
formation accounts for about 50 per cent, and contributions of other
services like recreation and nutrient cycling, are less than 10 per
cent each. The cost of climate regulation and habitat for wildlife are
about 6 per cent each.
255
2017-18BIOLOGY
SUMMARY
An ecosystem is a functional unit of nature and comprises abiotic and
biotic components. Abiotic components are inorganic materials- air,
water and soil, whereas biotic components are producers, consumers
and decomposers. Each ecosystem has characteristic physical structure
resulting from interaction amongst abiotic and biotic components.
Species composition and stratification are the two main structural
features of an ecosystem. Based on source of nutrition every organism
occupies a place in an ecosystem.
Productivity, decomposition, energy flow, and nutrient cycling are
the four important components of an ecosystem. Primary productivity
is the rate of capture of solar energy or biomass production of the
producers. It is divided into two types: gross primary productivity (GPP)
and net primary productivity (NPP). Rate of capture of solar energy or
total production of organic matter is called as GPP. NPP is the remaining
biomass or the energy left after utilisation of producers. Secondary
productivity is the rate of assimilation of food energy by the consumers.
In decomposition, complex organic compounds of detritus are converted
to carbon dioxide, water and inorganic nutrients by the decomposers.
Decomposition involves three processes, namely fragmentation of
detritus, leaching and catabolism.
Energy flow is unidirectional. First, plants capture solar energy
and then, food is transferred from the producers to decomposers.
Organisms of different trophic levels in nature are connected to each
other for food or energy relationship forming a food chain. The storage
and movement of nutrient elements through the various components
of the ecosystem is called nutrient cycling; nutrients are repeatedly
used through this process. Nutrient cycling is of two types—gaseous
and sedimentary. Atmosphere or hydrosphere is the reservoir for the
gaseous type of cycle (carbon), whereas Earth’s crust is the reservoir
for sedimentary type (phosphorus). Products of ecosystem processes
are named as ecosystem services, e.g., purification of air and water by
forests.
The biotic community is dynamic and undergoes changes with the
passage of time. These changes are sequentially ordered and constitute
ecological succession. Succession begins with invasion of a bare lifeless
area by pioneers which later pave way for successors and ultimately a
stable climax community is formed. The climax community remains
stable as long as the environment remains unchanged.
EXERCISES
256
1.
Fill in the blanks.
(a) Plants are called as_________because they fix carbon dioxide.
(b) In an ecosystem dominated by trees, the pyramid (of numbers)
is_________type.
(c) In aquatic ecosystems, the limiting factor for the productivity
is_________.
2017-18ECOSYSTEM
(d) Common detritivores in our ecosystem are_________.
(e) The major reservoir of carbon on earth is_________.
2. Which one of the following has the largest population in a food chain?
(a) Producers
(b) Primary consumers
(c) Secondary consumers
(d) Decomposers
3. The second trophic level in a lake is
(a) Phytoplankton
(b) Zooplankton
(c) Benthos
(d) Fishes
4. Secondary producers are
(a) Herbivores
(b) Producers
(c) Carnivores
(d) None of the above
5. What is the percentage of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) in
the incident solar radiation?
(a) 100%
(b) 50 %
(c) 1-5%
(d) 2-10%
6. Distinguish between
(a) Grazing food chain and detritus food chain
(b) Production and decomposition
(c) Upright and inverted pyramid
(d) Food chain and Food web
(e) Litter and detritus
(f) Primary and secondary productivity
7. Describe the components of an ecosystem.
8. Define ecological pyramids and describe with examples, pyramids of
number and biomass.
9. What is primary productivity? Give brief description of factors that affect
primary productivity.
10. Define decomposition and describe the processes and products of
decomposition.
11. Give an account of energy flow in an ecosystem.
257
12. Write important features of a sedimentary cycle in an ecosystem.
13. Outline salient features of carbon cycling i n an ecosystem.
2017-18
CHAPTER 15
BIODIVERSITY AND
CONSERVATION
15.1 Biodiversity
15.2 Biodiversity Conservation
If an alien from a distant galaxy were to visit our planet
Earth, the first thing that would amaze and baffle him
would most probably be the enormous diversity of life
that he would encounter. Even for humans, the rich variety
of living organisms with which they share this planet never
ceases to astonish and fascinate us. The common man
would find it hard to believe that there are more than
20,000 species of ants, 3,00,000 species of beetles, 28,000
species of fishes and nearly 20,000 species of orchids.
Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have been trying
to understand the significance of such diversity by asking
important questions– Why are there so many species?
Did such great diversity exist throughout earth’s history?
How did this diversification come about? How and why
is this diversity important to the biosphere? Would it
function any differently if the diversity was much less?
How do humans benefit from the diversity of life?
15.1 B IODIVERSITY
In our biosphere immense diversity (or heterogeneity)
exists not only at the species level but at all levels of
biological organisation ranging from macromolecules
within cells to biomes. Biodiversity is the term popularised
by the sociobiologist Edward Wilson to describe the
2017-18BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
combined diversity at all the levels of biological organisation.
The most important of them are–
(i) Genetic diversity : A single species might show high diversity at
the genetic level over its distributional range. The genetic variation
shown by the medicinal plant Rauwolfia vomitoria growing in
different Himalayan ranges might be in terms of the potency and
concentration of the active chemical (reserpine) that the plant
produces. India has more than 50,000 genetically different strains
of rice, and 1,000 varieties of mango.
(ii) Species diversity : The diversity at the species level. For example,
the Western Ghats have a greater amphibian species diversity than
the Eastern Ghats.
(iii) Ecological diversity : At the ecosystem level, India, for instance,
with its deserts, rain forests, mangroves, coral reefs, wetlands,
estuaries, and alpine meadows has a greater ecosystem diversity
than a Scandinavian country like Norway.
It has taken millions of years of evolution, to accumulate this rich
diversity in nature, but we could lose all that wealth in less than two
centuries if the present rates of species losses continue. Biodiversity and
its conservation are now vital environmental issues of international concern
as more and more people around the world begin to realise the critical
importance of biodiversity for our survival and well- being on this planet.
15.1.1 How Many Species are there on Earth and How Many
in India?
Since there are published records of all the species discovered and named,
we know how many species in all have been recorded so far, but it is not
easy to answer the question of how many species there are on earth.
According to the IUCN (2004), the total number of plant and animal species
described so far is slightly more than 1.5 million, but we have no clear
idea of how many species are yet to be discovered and described. Estimates
vary widely and many of them are only educated guesses. For many
taxonomic groups, species inventories are more complete in temperate
than in tropical countries. Considering that an overwhelmingly large
proportion of the species waiting to be discovered are in the tropics,
biologists make a statistical comparison of the temperate-tropical species
richness of an exhaustively studied group of insects and extrapolate this
ratio to other groups of animals and plants to come up with a gross
estimate of the total number of species on earth. Some extreme estimates
range from 20 to 50 million, but a more conservative and scientifically
sound estimate made by Robert May places the global species diversity
at about 7 million.
259
2017-18BIOLOGY
Let us look at some interesting aspects about earth’s biodiversity based
on the currently available species inventories. More than 70 per cent of
all the species recorded are animals, while plants (including algae, fungi,
bryophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms) comprise no more than 22
per cent of the total. Among animals, insects are the most species-rich
taxonomic group, making up more than 70 per cent of the total. That
means, out of every 10 animals on this planet, 7 are insects. Again, how
do we explain this enormous diversification of insects? The number of
fungi species in the world is more than the combined total of the species
of fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals. In Figure 15.1, biodiversity
is depicted showing species number of major taxa.
Figure 15.1 Representing global biodiversity: proportionate number of
species of major taxa of plants, invertebrates and vertebrates
260
It should be noted that these estimates do not give any figures for
prokaryotes. Biologists are not sure about how many prokaryotic species
there might be. The problem is that conventional taxonomic methods are
not suitable for identifying microbial species and many species are simply
not culturable under laboratory conditions. If we accept biochemical or
molecular criteria for delineating species for this group, then their diversity
alone might run into millions.
2017-18BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
Although India has only 2.4 per cent of the world’s land area, its share
of the global species diversity is an impressive 8.1 per cent. That is what
makes our country one of the 12 mega diversity countries of the world.
Nearly 45,000 species of plants and twice as many of animals have been
recorded from India. How many living species are actually there waiting
to be discovered and named? If we accept May’s global estimates, only
22 per cent of the total species have been recorded so far. Applying this
proportion to India’s diversity figures, we estimate that there are probably
more than 1,00,000 plant species and more than 3,00, 000 animal species
yet to be discovered and described. Would we ever be able to complete
the inventory of the biological wealth of our country? Consider the immense
trained manpower (taxonomists) and the time required to complete the
job. The situation appears more hopeless when we realise that a large
fraction of these species faces the threat of becoming extinct even before
we discover them. Nature’s biological library is burning even before we
catalogued the titles of all the books stocked there.
15.1.2 Patterns of Biodiversity
(i) Latitudinal gradients : The diversity of plants and animals is
not uniform throughout the world but shows a rather uneven
distribution. For many group of animals or plants, there are
interesting patterns in diversity, the most well- known being the
latitudinal gradient in diversity. In general, species diversity
decreases as we move away from the equator towards the poles.
With very few exceptions, tropics (latitudinal range of 23.5° N to
23.5° S) harbour more species than temperate or polar areas.
Colombia located near the equator has nearly 1,400 species of birds
while New York at 41° N has 105 species and Greenland at 71° N
only 56 species. India, with much of its land area in the tropical
latitudes, has more than 1,200 species of birds. A forest in a tropical
region like Equador has up to 10 times as many species of vascular
plants as a forest of equal area in a temperate region like the Midwest
of the USA. The largely tropical Amazonian rain forest in South
America has the greatest biodiversity on earth- it is home to more
than 40,000 species of plants, 3,000 of fishes, 1,300 of birds, 427
of mammals, 427 of amphibians, 378 of reptiles and of more than
1,25,000 invertebrates. Scientists estimate that in these rain forests
there might be at least two million insect species waiting to be
discovered and named.
What is so special about tropics that might account for their greater
biological diversity? Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have
proposed various hypotheses; some important ones are (a) Speciation
is generally a function of time, unlike temperate regions subjected
to frequent glaciations in the past, tropical latitudes have remained
relatively undisturbed for millions of years and thus, had a long
261
2017-18BIOLOGY
evolutionary time for species diversification, (b) Tropical environments,
unlike temperate ones, are less seasonal, relatively more constant
and predictable. Such constant environments promote niche
specialisation and lead to a greater species diversity and (c) There
is more solar energy available in the tropics, which contributes to
higher productivity; this in turn might contribute indirectly to greater
diversity.
(ii) Species-Area relationships : During his pioneering and extensive
explorations in the wilderness of South American jungles, the great
German naturalist and geographer Alexander von Humboldt
observed that within a region species
richness increased with increasing
explored area, but only up to a limit. In
fact, the relation between species richness
and area for a wide variety of taxa
(angiosperm plants, birds, bats,
freshwater fishes) turns out to be a
rectangular hyperbola (Figure15.2). On
a logarithmic scale, the relationship is a
straight line described by the equation
log S = log C + Z log A
where
S= Species richness A= Area
Z = slope of the line (regression
coefficient)
C = Y-intercept
Ecologists have discovered that the
Figure 15.2 Showing species area relationship.
value of Z lies in the range of 0.1 to 0.2,
Note that on log scale the relationship
regardless of the taxonomic group or the
becomes linear
region (whether it is the plants in Britain,
birds in California or molluscs in New York state, the slopes of the regression
line are amazingly similar). But, if you analyse the species-area
relationships among very large areas like the entire continents, you will
find that the slope of the line to be much steeper (Z values in the range
of 0.6 to 1.2). For example, for frugivorous (fruit-eating) birds and
mammals in the tropical forests of different continents, the slope is found
to be 1.15. What do steeper slopes mean in this context?
262
15.1.3 The importance of Species Diversity to the Ecosystem
Does the number of species in a community really matter to the functioning
of the ecosystem?This is a question for which ecologists have not been
able to give a definitive answer. For many decades, ecologists believed
that communities with more species, generally, tend to be more stable
than those with less species. What exactly is stability for a biological
2017-18BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
community? A stable community should not show too much variation
in productivity from year to year; it must be either resistant or resilient to
occasional disturbances (natural or man-made), and it must also be
resistant to invasions by alien species. We don’t know how these attributes
are linked to species richness in a community, but David Tilman’s
long-term ecosystem experiments using outdoor plots provide some
tentative answers. Tilman found that plots with more species showed
less year-to-year variation in total biomass. He also showed that in his
experiments, increased diversity contributed to higher productivity.
Although, we may not understand completely how species richness
contributes to the well-being of an ecosystem, we know enough to realise
that rich biodiversity is not only essential for ecosystem health but
imperative for the very survival of the human race on this planet. At a
time when we are losing species at an alarming pace, one might ask–
Does it really matter to us if a few species become extinct? Would Western
Ghats ecosystems be less functional if one of its tree frog species is lost
forever? How is our quality of life affected if, say, instead of 20,000 we
have only 15,000 species of ants on earth?
There are no direct answers to such näive questions but we can develop
a proper perspective through an analogy (the ‘rivet popper hypothesis’)
used by Stanford ecologist Paul Ehrlich. In an airplane (ecosystem) all
parts are joined together using thousands of rivets (species). If every
passenger travelling in it starts popping a rivet to take home (causing a
species to become extinct), it may not affect flight safety (proper functioning
of the ecosystem) initially, but as more and more rivets are removed, the
plane becomes dangerously weak over a period of time. Furthermore,
which rivet is removed may also be critical. Loss of rivets on the wings
(key species that drive major ecosystem functions) is obviously a more
serious threat to flight safety than loss of a few rivets on the seats or
windows inside the plane.
15.1.4 Loss of Biodiversity
While it is doubtful if any new species are being added (through speciation)
into the earth’s treasury of species, there is no doubt about their continuing
losses. The biological wealth of our planet has been declining rapidly
and the accusing finger is clearly pointing to human activities. The
colonisation of tropical Pacific Islands by humans is said to have led to
the extinction of more than 2,000 species of native birds. The IUCN Red
List (2004) documents the extinction of 784 species (including 338
vertebrates, 359 invertebrates and 87 plants) in the last 500 years. Some
examples of recent extinctions include the dodo (Mauritius), quagga
(Africa), thylacine (Australia), Steller’s Sea Cow (Russia) and three
subspecies (Bali, Javan, Caspian) of tiger. The last twenty years alone
have witnessed the disappearance of 27 species. Careful analysis of records
263
2017-18BIOLOGY
264
shows that extinctions across taxa are not random; some groups like
amphibians appear to be more vulnerable to extinction. Adding to the
grim scenario of extinctions is the fact that more than 15,500 species
world-wide are facing the threat of extinction. Presently, 12 per cent of
all bird species, 23 per cent of all mammal species, 32 per cent of all
amphibian species and 31per cent of all gymnosperm species in the world
face the threat of extinction.
From a study of the history of life on earth through fossil records, we
learn that large-scale loss of species like the one we are currently
witnessing have also happened earlier, even before humans appeared on
the scene. During the long period (> 3 billion years) since the origin and
diversification of life on earth there were five episodes of mass extinction
of species. How is the ‘Sixth Extinction’ presently in progress different
from the previous episodes? The difference is in the rates; the current
species extinction rates are estimated to be 100 to 1,000 times faster
than in the pre-human times and our activities are responsible for the
faster rates. Ecologists warn that if the present trends continue,
nearly half of all the species on earth might be wiped out within the next
100 years.
In general, loss of biodiversity in a region may lead to (a) decline in
plant production, (b) lowered resistance to environmental perturbations
such as drought and (c) increased variability in certain ecosystem processes
such as plant productivity, water use, and pest and disease cycles.
Causes of biodiversity losses: The accelerated rates of species
extinctions that the world is facing now are largely due to human
activities. There are four major causes (‘ The Evil Quartet ’ is the sobriquet
used to describe them).
(i) Habitat loss and fragmentation: This is the most important
cause driving animals and plants to extinction. The most dramatic
examples of habitat loss come from tropical rain forests. Once
covering more than 14 per cent of the earth’s land surface, these
rain forests now cover no more than 6 per cent. They are being
destroyed fast. By the time you finish reading this chapter, 1000
more hectares of rain forest would have been lost. The Amazon
rain forest (it is so huge that it is called the ‘lungs of the planet’)
harbouring probably millions of species is being cut and cleared
for cultivating soya beans or for conversion to grasslands for raising
beef cattle. Besides total loss, the degradation of many habitats by
pollution also threatens the survival of many species. When large
habitats are broken up into small fragments due to various human
activities, mammals and birds requiring large territories and certain
animals with migratory habits are badly affected, leading to
population declines.
(ii) Over-exploitation: Humans have always depended on nature for
food and shelter, but when ‘need’ turns to ‘greed’, it leads to
2017-18BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
over -exploitation of natural resources. Many species extinctions
in the last 500 years (Steller’s sea cow, passenger pigeon) were due
to overexploitation by humans. Presently many marine fish
populations around the world are over harvested, endangering the
continued existence of some commercially important species.
(iii) Alien species invasions: When alien species are introduced
unintentionally or deliberately for whatever purpose, some of them
turn invasive, and cause decline or extinction of indigenous species.
The Nile perch introduced into Lake Victoria in east Africa led
eventually to the extinction of an ecologically unique assemblage of
more than 200 species of cichlid fish in the lake. You must be
familiar with the environmental damage caused and threat posed
to our native species by invasive weed species like carrot grass
(Parthenium), Lantana and water hyacinth (Eicchornia). The recent
illegal introduction of the African catfish Clarias gariepinus for
aquaculture purposes is posing a threat to the indigenous catfishes
in our rivers.
(iv) Co-extinctions: When a species becomes extinct, the plant and
animal species associated with it in an obligatory way also become
extinct. When a host fish species becomes extinct, its unique
assemblage of parasites also meets the same fate. Another example
is the case of a coevolved plant-pollinator mutualism where
extinction of one invariably leads to the extinction of the other.
15.2 B IODIVERSITY C ONSERVATION
15.2.1 Why Should We Conserve Biodiversity?
There are many reasons, some obvious and others not so obvious, but all
equally important. They can be grouped into three categories: narrowly
utilitarian, broadly utilitarian, and ethical.
The narrowly utilitarian arguments for conserving biodiversity are
obvious; humans derive countless direct economic benefits from nature-
food (cereals, pulses, fruits), firewood, fibre, construction material,
industrial products (tannins, lubricants, dyes, resins, perfumes ) and
products of medicinal importance. More than 25 per cent of the drugs
currently sold in the market worldwide are derived from plants and 25,000
species of plants contribute to the traditional medicines used by native
peoples around the world. Nobody knows how many more medicinally
useful plants there are in tropical rain forests waiting to be explored.
With increasing resources put into ‘bioprospecting’ (exploring molecular,
genetic and species-level diversity for products of economic importance),
nations endowed with rich biodiversity can expect to reap enormous
benefits.
The broadly utilitarian argument says that biodiversity plays a
major role in many ecosystem services that nature provides. The fast-
265
2017-18BIOLOGY
dwindling Amazon forest is estimated to produce, through
photosynthesis, 20 per cent of the total oxygen in the earth’s atmosphere.
Can we put an economic value on this service by nature? You can get
some idea by finding out how much your neighborhood hospital spends
on a cylinder of oxygen. Pollination (without which plants cannot give
us fruits or seeds) is another service, ecosystems provide through
pollinators layer – bees, bumblebees, birds and bats. What will be the
costs of accomplishing pollination without help from natural
pollinators? There are other intangible benefits – that we derive from
nature–the aesthetic pleasures of walking through thick woods, watching
spring flowers in full bloom or waking up to a bulbul’s song in the
morning. Can we put a price tag on such things?
The ethical argument for conserving biodiversity relates to what we
owe to millions of plant, animal and microbe species with whom we share
this planet. Philosophically or spiritually, we need to realise that every
species has an intrinsic value, even if it may not be of current or any
economic value to us. We have a moral duty to care for their well-being
and pass on our biological legacy in good order to future generations.
15.2.2 How do we conserve Biodiversity?
266
When we conserve and protect the whole ecosystem, its biodiversity at all
levels is protected - we save the entire forest to save the tiger. This approach
is called in situ (on site) conservation. However, when there are situations
where an animal or plant is endangered or threatened (Please see Page
290 also) and needs urgent measures to save it from extinction, ex situ
(off site) conservation is the desirable approach.
In situ conservation– Faced with the conflict between development and
conservation, many nations find it unrealistic and economically not feasible
to conserve all their biological wealth. Invariably, the number of species
waiting to be saved from extinction far exceeds the conservation resources
available. On a global basis, this problem has been addressed by eminent
conservationists. They identified for maximum protection certain
‘biodiversity hotspots’ regions with very high levels of species richness
and high degree of endemism (that is, species confined to that region
and not found anywhere else). Initially 25 biodiversity hotspots were
identified but subsequently nine more have been added to the list,
bringing the total number of biodiversity hotspots in the world to 34.
These hotspots are also regions of accelerated habitat loss. Three of
these hotspots – Western Ghats and Sri Lanka, Indo-Burma and
Himalaya – cover our country’s exceptionally high biodiversity regions.
Although all the biodiversity hotspots put together cover less than 2
percent of the earth’s land area, the number of species they collectively
harbour is extremely high and strict protection of these hotspots could
reduce the ongoing mass extinctions by almost 30 per cent.
2017-18BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
In India, ecologically unique and biodiversity-rich regions are legally
protected as biosphere reserves, national parks and sanctuaries. India
now has 14 biosphere reserves, 90 national parks and 448 wildlife
sanctuaries. India has also a history of religious and cultural traditions
that emphasised protection of nature. In many cultures, tracts of forest
were set aside, and all the trees and wildlife within were venerated and
given total protection. Such sacred groves are found in Khasi and Jaintia
Hills in Meghalaya, Aravalli Hills of Rajasthan, Western Ghat regions of
Karnataka and Maharashtra and the Sarguja, Chanda and Bastar areas
of Madhya Pradesh. In Meghalaya, the sacred groves are the last refuges
for a large number of rare and threatened plants.
Ex situ Conservation– In this approach, threatened animals and plants
are taken out from their natural habitat and placed in special setting
where they can be protected and given special care. Zoological parks,
botanical gardens and wildlife safari parks serve this purpose. There are
many animals that have become extinct in the wild but continue to be
maintained in zoological parks. In recent years ex situ conservation has
advanced beyond keeping threatened species in enclosures. Now gametes
of threatened species can be preserved in viable and fertile condition for
long periods using cryopreservation techniques, eggs can be fertilised in
vitro, and plants can be propagated using tissue culture methods. Seeds
of different genetic strains of commercially important plants can be kept
for long periods in seed banks.
Biodiversity knows no political boundaries and its conservation is
therefore a collective responsibility of all nations. The historic Convention
on Biological Diversity (‘The Earth Summit’) held in Rio de Janeiro in
1992, called upon all nations to take appropriate measures for
conservation of biodiversity and sustainable utilisation of its benefits. In
a follow-up, the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in 2002
in Johannesburg, South Africa, 190 countries pledged their commitment
to achieve by 2010, a significant reduction in the current rate of biodiversity
loss at global, regional and local levels.
SUMMARY
Since life originated on earth nearly 3.8 billion years ago, there had
been enormous diversification of life forms on earth. Biodiversity refers
to the sum total of diversity that exists at all levels of biological
organisation. Of particular importance is the diversity at genetic, species
and ecosystem levels and conservation efforts are aimed at protecting
diversity at all these levels.
More than 1.5 million species have been recorded in the world, but
there might still be nearly 6 million species on earth waiting to be
discovered and named. Of the named species, > 70 per cent are animals,
of which 70 per cent are insects. The group Fungi has more species
267
2017-18BIOLOGY
than all the vertebrate species combined. India, with about 45,000
species of plants and twice as many species of animals, is one of the 12
mega diversity countries of the world.
Species diversity on earth is not uniformly distributed but shows
interesting patterns. It is generally highest in the tropics and decreases
towards the poles. Important explanations for the species richness of
the tropics are: Tropics had more evolutionary time; they provide a
relatively constant environment and, they receive more solar energy
which contributes to greater productivity. Species richness is also
function of the area of a region; the species-area relationship is generally
a rectangular hyperbolic function.
It is believed that communities with high diversity tend to be less
variable, more productive and more resistant to biological invasions.
Earth’s fossil history reveals incidence of mass extinctions in the past,
but the present rates of extinction, largely attributed to human activities,
are 100 to 1000 times higher. Nearly 700 species have become extinct
in recent times and more than 15,500 species (of which > 650 are from
India) currently face the threat of extinction. The causes of high
extinction rates at present include habitat (particularly forests) loss
and fragmentation, over -exploitation, biological invasions and
co- extinctions.
Earth’s rich biodiversity is vital for the very survival of mankind.
The reasons for conserving biodiversity are narrowly utilitarian, broadly
utilitarian and ethical. Besides the direct benefits (food, fibre, firewood,
pharmaceuticals, etc.), there are many indirect benefits we receive
through ecosystem services such as pollination, pest control, climate
moderation and flood control. We also have a moral responsibility to
take good care of earth’s biodiversity and pass it on in good order to our
next generation.
Biodiversity conservation may be in situ as well as ex situ. In in situ
conservation, the endangered species are protected in their natural
habitat so that the entire ecosystem is protected. Recently, 34
‘biodiversity hotspots’ in the world have been proposed for intensive
conservation efforts. Of these, three (Western Ghats-Sri Lanka,
Himalaya and Indo-Burma) cover India’s rich biodiversity regions. Our
country’s in situ conservation efforts are reflected in its 14 biosphere
reserves, 90 national parks, > 450 wildlife sanctuaries and many sacred
groves. Ex situ conservation methods include protective maintenance
of threatened species in zoological parks and botanical gardens, in vitro
fertilisation, tissue culture propagation and cryopreservation of
gametes.
268
EXERCISES
1.
2.
Name the three important components of biodiversity.
How do ecologists estimate the total number of species present in the
world?
2017-18BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
3.
Give three hypotheses for explaining why tropics show greatest levels
of species richness.
4. What is the significance of the slope of regression in a species – area
relationship?
5. What are the major causes of species losses in a geographical region?
6. How is biodiversity important for ecosystem functioning?
7. What are sacred groves? What is their role in conservation?
8. Among the ecosystem services are control of floods and soil erosion.
How is this achieved by the biotic components of the ecosystem?
9. The species diversity of plants (22 per cent) is much less than that of
animals (72 per cent). What could be the explanations to how animals
achieved greater diversification?
10. Can you think of a situation where we deliberately want to make a
species extinct? How would you justify it?
269
2017-18
CHAPTER 16
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
16.1 Air Pollution and Its
Control
16.2 Water Pollution and Its
Control
16.3 Solid Wastes
16.4 Agro-chemicals and
their Effects
16.5 Radioactive Wastes
16.6 Greenhouse Effect and
Global Warming
16.7 Ozone Depletion in the
Stratosphere
16.8 Degradation by Improper
Resource Utilisation and
Maintenance
Human population size has grown enormously over the
last hundred years. This means increase in demand for
food, water, home, electricity, roads, automobiles and
numerous other commodities. These demands are exerting
tremendous pressure on our natural resources, and are
also contributing to pollution of air, water and soil. The
need of the hour is to check the degradation and depletion
of our precious natural resources and pollution without
halting the process of development.
Pollution is any undesirable change in physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of air, land, water or
soil. Agents that bring about such an undesirable change
are called as pollutants. In order to control environmental
pollution, the Government of India has passed the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to protect
and improve the quality of our environment (air, water
and soil).
16.9 Deforestation
16.1 A IR P OLLUTION
AND ITS
C ONTROL
We are dependent on air for our respiratory needs. Air
pollutants cause injury to all living organisms. They
reduce growth and yield of crops and cause premature
death of plants. Air pollutants also deleteriously affect the
respiratory system of humans and of animals. HarmfulENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
effects depend on the concentration of pollutants, duration of exposure
and the organism.
Smokestacks of thermal power plants, smelters and other industries
release particulate and gaseous air pollutants together with harmless
gases, such as nitrogen, oxygen, etc. These pollutants must be separated/
filtered out before releasing the harmless gases into the atmosphere.
Figure 16.1 Electrostatic precipitator
There are several ways of removing particulate matter; the most widely
used of which is the electrostatic precipitator (Figure 16.1), which can
remove over 99 per cent particulate matter present in the exhaust from a
thermal power plant. It has electrode wires that are maintained at several
thousand volts, which produce a corona that releases electrons. These
electrons attach to dust particles giving them a net negative charge. The
collecting plates are grounded and attract the charged dust particles.
The velocity of air between the plates must be low enough to allow the
dust to fall. A scrubber (Figure 16.1) can remove gases like sulphur
dioxide. In a scrubber, the exhaust is passed through a spray of water or
lime. Recently we have realised the dangers of particulate matter that are
very very small and are not removed by these precipitators. According to
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), particulate size 2.5 micrometers
or less in diameter (PM 2.5) are responsible for causing the greatest harm
to human health. These fine particulates can be inhaled deep into the
lungs and can cause breathing and respiratory symptoms, irritation,
inflammations and damage to the lungs and premature deaths.
271BIOLOGY
Automobiles are a major cause for atmospheric pollution atleast in
the metro cities. As the number of vehicles increase on the streets, this
problem is now shifting to the other cities too. Proper maintenance of
automobiles along with use of lead-free petrol or diesel can reduce the
pollutants they emit. Catalytic converters, having expensive metals namely
platinum-palladium and rhodium as the catalysts, are fitted into
automobiles for reducing emission of poisonous gases. As the exhaust
passes through the catalytic converter, unburnt hydrocarbons are
converted into carbon dioxide and water, and carbon monoxide and nitric
oxide are changed to carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas, respectively. Motor
vehicles equipped with catalytic converter should use unleaded petrol
because lead in the petrol inactivates the catalyst.
In India, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act came
into force in 1981, but was amended in 1987 to include noise as an air
pollutant. Noise is undesired high level of sound. We have got used to
associating loud sounds with pleasure and entertainment not realising
that noise causes psychological and physiological disorders in humans.
The bigger the city, the bigger the function, the greater the noise!! A
brief exposure to extremely high sound level, 150 dB or more generated
by take off of a jet plane or rocket, may damage ear drums thus
permanently impairing hearing ability. Even chronic exposure to a
relatively lower noise level of cities may permanently damage hearing
abilities of humans. Noise also causes sleeplessness, increased heart
beat, altered breathing pattern, thus considerably stressing humans.
Considering the many dangerous effects of noise pollution can you
identify the unnecessary sources of noise pollution around you which
can be reduced immediately without any financial loss to anybody?
Reduction of noise in our industries can be affected by use of sound-
absorbent materials or by muffling noise. Stringent following of laws laid
down in relation to noise like delimitation of horn-free zones around
hospitals and schools, permissible sound-levels of crackers and of loud-
speakers, timings after which loudspeakers cannot be played, etc., need
to be enforced to protect ourselves from noise pollution.
16.1.1 Controlling Vehicular Air Pollution: A Case
Study of Delhi
272
With its very large population of vehicular traffic, Delhi leads the coun-
try in its levels of air-pollution – it has more cars than the states of
Gujarat and West Bengal put together. In the 1990s, Delhi ranked
fourth among the 41 most polluted cities of the world. Air pollution
problems in Delhi became so serious that a public interest litigation
(PIL) was filed in the Supreme Court of India. After being censured very
strongly by the Supreme Court, under its directives, the government
was asked to take, within a specified time period, appropriate meas-
ures, including switching over the entire fleet of public transport, i.e.,
buses, from diesel to compressed natural gas (CNG). All the buses of
Delhi were converted to run on CNG by the end of 2002. You may ask
the question as to why CNG is better than diesel. The answer is thatENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
CNG burns most efficiently, unlike petrol or diesel, in the automobiles
and very little of it is left unburnt. Moreover, CNG is cheaper than petrol
or diesel, cannot be siphoned off by thieves and adulterated like petrol
or diesel. The main problem with switching over to CNG is the difficulty
of laying down pipelines to deliver CNG through distribution points/
pumps and ensuring uninterrupted supply. Simultaneously parallel
steps taken in Delhi for reducing vehicular pollution include phasing
out of old vehicles, use of unleaded petrol, use of low-sulphur petrol
and diesel, use of catalytic converters in vehicles, application of stringent
pollution-level norms for vehicles, etc.
The Government of India through a new auto fuel policy has laid
out a roadmap to cut down vehicular pollution in Indian cities. More
stringent norms for fuels means steadily reducing the sulphur and
aromatic content in petrol and diesel fuels. Euro III norms, for example,
stipulate that sulphur be controlled at 350 parts-per-million (ppm) in
diesel and 150 ppm in petrol. Aromatic hydrocarbons are to be contained
at 42 per cent of the concerned fuel. The goal, according to the roadmap,
is to reduce sulphur to 50 ppm in petrol and diesel and bring down the
level to 35 per cent. Corresponding to the fuel, vehicle engines will also
need to be upgraded.
Mass Emission Standards (Bharat Stage II which is equivalent to Euro-
II norms) are no more applicable in any of the cities of India. Details of the
latest Mass Emission Standards in India are provided below (Table 16.1)
Table 16.1: Table Showing the Mass Emission Standards in India
Type of Vehicles Norms Cities of Implementation
4 Wheelers Bharat Stage III 4 Wheelers Bharat Stage IV 3 Wheelers Bharat Stage III 2 Wheelers Bharat Stage III Throughout the country
since October 2010
13 Mega cities (Delhi and
NCR, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Chennai, Bangalore, Surat,
Kanpur, Agra, Lucknow and
Sholapur) since April, 2010
Throughout the country
since October 2010
Throughout the country
since October 2010
Thanks to the efforts made, the air quality of Delhi has significantly
improved. According to an estimate, a substantial fall in CO 2 and SO 2
level has been found in Delhi between 1997 and 2005.
16.2 W ATER P OLLUTION
AND ITS
C ONTROL
Human beings have been abusing the water-bodies around the world by
disposing into them all kinds of waste. We tend to believe that water can
wash away everything not taking cognizance of the fact that the water
bodies are our lifeline as well as that of all other living organisms. Can
you list what all we tend to try and wash away through our rivers and
drains? Due to such activities of human kind, the ponds, lakes, stream,
273BIOLOGY
rivers, estuaries and oceans are becoming polluted in several parts of the
world. Realising the importance of maintaining the cleanliness of the water
bodies, the Government of India has passed the Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to safeguard our water resources.
16.2.1 Domestic Sewage and Industrial Effluents
As we work with water in our homes in the cities and towns, we wash
everything into drains. Have you
ever wondered where the sewage
that comes out of our houses go?
What happens in villages? Is the
sewage treated before being
transported to the nearest river
and mixed with it? A mere 0.1
per cent impurities make
domestic sewage unfit for human
use (Figure 16.2). You have read
about sewage treatment
plants in Chapter 10. Solids are
relatively easy to remove, what
Figure 16.2 Composition of waste water
is most difficult to remove are
274
Figure 16.3 Effect of sewage discharge on some important characteristics of a riverENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
dissolved salts such as nitrates, phosphates, and other nutrients, and
toxic metal ions and organic compounds. Domestic sewage primarily
contains biodegradable organic matter, which readily decomposes –
thanks to bacteria and other micro-organisms, which can multiply using
these organic substances as substrates and hence utilise some of the
components of sewage. It is possible to estimate the amount of
biodegradable organic matter in sewage water by measuring Biochemical
Oxygen Demand (BOD). Can you explain how? In the chapter on micro-
organisms you have read about the relation between BOD, micro-
organisms and the amount of biodegradable matter.
Figure 16.3 shows some of the changes that one may notice following
discharge of sewage into a river. Micro-organisms involved in
biodegradation of organic matter in the receiving water body consume a
lot of oxygen, and as a result there is a sharp decline in dissolved oxygen
downstream from the point of sewage discharge. This causes mortality of
fish and other aquatic creatures.
Presence of large amounts of nutrients in waters also causes excessive
growth of planktonic (free-floating) algae, called an algal bloom
(Figure 16.4) which imparts a distinct colour to the water bodies. Algal
blooms cause deterioration of the water quality and fish mortality. Some
bloom-forming algae are extremely toxic to human beings and animals.
You may have seen the beautiful mauve-colored flowers found on
very appealingly-shaped floating plants in water bodies. These plants
which were introduced into India for their lovely flowers have caused havoc
by their excessive growth by causing blocks in our waterways. They grow
faster than our ability to remove them. These are plants of water hyacinth
(Eichhornia crassipes), the world’s most problematic aquatic weed, also
275
Figure 16.4 Pictorial view of an algal bloomBIOLOGY
called ‘ Terror of Bengal ’. They grow abundantly in
eutrophic water bodies, and lead to an imbalance in the
ecosystem dynamics of the water body.
Sewage from our homes as well as from hospitals are
likely to contain many undesirable pathogenic micro-
organisms, and its disposal into a water without proper
treatment may cause outbreak of serious diseases, such
as, dysentery, typhoid, jaundice, cholera, etc.
Unlike domestic sewage, waste water from industries
like petroleum, paper manufacturing, metal extraction and
processing, chemical manufacturing, etc., often contain
toxic substances, notably, heavy metals (defined as
elements with density > 5 g/cm 3 such as mercury,
cadmium, copper, lead, etc.) and a variety of organic
compounds.
A few toxic substances, often present in industrial
waste waters, can undergo biological magnification
(Biomagnification) in the aquatic food chain.
Biomagnification refers to increase in concentration of
the toxicant at successive trophic levels. This happens
because a toxic substance accumulated by an organism
cannot be metabolised or excreted, and is thus passed on
to the next higher trophic level. This phenomenon is well-
known for mercury and DDT. Figure 16.5 shows
biomagnification of DDT in an aquatic food chain. In this
manner, the concentration of DDT is increased at
successive trophic levels; say if it starts at 0.003 ppb
(ppb = parts per billion) in water, it can ultimately reach
25 ppm (ppm = parts per million) in fish-eating birds,
through biomagnification. High concentrations of DDT
Figure 16.5 Biomagnification of disturb calcium metabolism in birds, which causes
DDT in an aquatic thinning of eggshell and their premature breaking,
food chain
eventually causing decline in bird populations.
Eutrophication is the natural aging of a lake by
nutrient enrichment of its water. In a young lake the water is cold and
clear, supporting little life. With time, streams draining into the lake
introduce nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, which encourage
the growth of aquatic organisms. As the lake’s fertility increases, plant
and animal life burgeons, and organic remains begin to be deposited on
276
the lake bottom. Over the centuries, as silt and organic debris pile up, the
lake grows shallower and warmer, with warm-water organisms
supplanting those that thrive in a cold environment. Marsh plants take
root in the shallows and begin to fill in the original lake basin. Eventually,
the lake gives way to large masses of floating plants (bog), finally converting
into land. Depending on climate, size of the lake and other factors, theENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
natural aging of a lake may span thousands of years. However, pollutants
from man’s activities like effluents from the industries and homes can
radically accelerate the aging process. This phenomenon has been called
Cultural or Accelerated Eutrophication. During the past century, lakes
in many parts of the earth have been severely eutrophied by sewage and
agricultural and industrial wastes. The prime contaminants are nitrates
and phosphates, which act as plant nutrients. They overstimulate the
growth of algae, causing unsightly scum and unpleasant odors, and
robbing the water of dissolved oxygen vital to other aquatic life. At the
same time, other pollutants flowing into a lake may poison whole
populations of fish, whose decomposing remains further deplete the
water’s dissolved oxygen content. In such fashion, a lake can literally
choke to death.
Heated (thermal) wastewaters flowing out of electricity-generating units,
e.g., thermal power plants, constitute another important category of
pollutants. Thermal wastewater eliminates or reduces the number of
organisms sensitive to high temperature, and may enhance the growth of
plants and fish in extremely cold areas but, only after causing damage to
the indigenous flora and fauna.
16.2.2 A Case Study of Integrated Waste Water Treatment
Wastewater including sewage can be treated in an integrated manner, by
utilising a mix of artificial and natural processes. An example of such an
initiative is the town of Arcata, situated along the northern coast of
California. Collaborating with biologists from the Humboldt
State University, the townspeople created an integrated waste water
treatment process within a natural system. The cleaning occurs in two
stages – (a) the conventional sedimentation, filtering and chlorine
treatments are given. After this stage, lots of dangerous pollutants like
dissolved heavy metals still remain. To combat this, an innovative
approach was taken and (b) the biologists developed a series of six
connected marshes over 60 hectares of marshland. Appropriate plants,
algae, fungi and bacteria were seeded into this area, which neutralise,
absorb and assimilate the pollutants. Hence, as the water flows through
the marshes, it gets purified naturally.
The marshes also constitute a sanctuary, with a high level of
biodiversity in the form of fishes, animals and birds that now reside there.
A citizens group called Friends of the Arcata Marsh (FOAM) are responsible
for the upkeep and safeguarding of this wonderful project. .
All this time, we have assumed that removal of wastes requires water,
i.e., the creation of sewage. But what if water is not necessary to dispose
off human waste, like excreta? Can you imagine the amount of water that
one can save if one didn’t have to flush the toilet? Well, this is already a
reality. Ecological sanitation is a sustainable system for handling human
277BIOLOGY
excreta, using dry composting toilets. This is a practical, hygienic, efficient
and cost-effective solution to human waste disposal. The key point to
note here is that with this composting method, human excreta can be
recycled into a resource (as natural fertiliser), which reduces the need for
chemical fertilisers. There are working ‘EcoSan’ toilets in many areas of
Kerala and Sri Lanka.
16.3 S OLID W ASTES
278
Solid wastes refer to everything that goes out in trash. Municipal solid
wastes are wastes from homes, offices, stores, schools, hospitals, etc.,
that are collected and disposed by the municipality. The municipal solid
wastes generally comprise paper, food wastes, plastics, glass, metals,
rubber, leather, textile, etc. Burning reduces the volume of the wastes,
although it is generally not burnt to completion and open dumps often
serve as the breeding ground for rats and flies. Sanitary landfills were
adopted as the substitute for open-burning dumps. In a sanitary landfill,
wastes are dumped in a depression or trench after compaction, and
covered with dirt everyday. If you live in a town or city, do you know
where the nearest landfill site is? Landfills are also not really much of
a solution since the amount of garbage generation specially in the metros
has increased so much that these sites are getting filled too. Also there
is danger of seepage of chemicals, etc., from these landfills polluting the
underground water resources.
A solution to all this can only be in human beings becoming more
sensitive to these environment issues. All waste that we generate can
be categorised into three types – (a) bio-degradable, (b) recyclable and
(c) the non-biodegradable. It is important that all garbage generated is
sorted. What can be reused or recycled should be separated out; our
kabadiwallahs and rag-pickers do a great job of separation of materials
for recycling. The biodegradable materials can be put into deep pits in
the ground and be left for natural breakdown. That leaves only the non-
biodegradable to be disposed off . The need to reduce our garbage
generation should be a prime goal, instead, we are increasing the use of
non-biodegradable products. Just pick any readymade packet of any
‘good quality’ eatable, say a biscuit packet, and study the packaging –
do you see the number of protective layers used? Note that atleast one
layer is of plastic. We have started packaging even our daily use products
like milk and water in polybags!! In cities, fruits and vegetables can be
bought packed in beautiful polysterene and plastic packaging – we pay
so much and what do we do? Contribute heavily to environmental
pollution. State Governments across the country are trying to push for
reduction in use of plastics and use of eco-friendly packaging. We can do
our bit by carrying cloth or other natural fibre carry-bags when we go
shopping and by refusing polythene bags.ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
Hospitals generate hazardous wastes that contain disinfectants and
other harmful chemicals, and also pathogenic micro-organisms. Such
wastes also require careful treatment and disposal. The use of incinerators
is crucial to disposal of hospital waste.
Irreparable computers and other electronic goods are known as
electronic wastes (e-wastes). E-wastes are buried in landfills or
incinerated. Over half of the e-wastes generated in the developed world
are exported to developing countries, mainly to China, India and Pakistan,
where metals like copper, iron, silicon, nickel and gold are recovered
during recycling process. Unlike developed countries, which have
specifically built facilities for recycling of e-wastes, recycling in developing
countries often involves manual participation thus exposing workers to
toxic substances present in e-wastes. Recycling is the only solution for
the treatment of e-waste, provided it is carried out in an environment-
friendly manner.
16.3.1 Case Study of Remedy for Plastic Waste
A plastic sack manufacturer in Bangalore has managed to find the ideal
solution to the ever-increasing problem of accumulating plastic waste.
Ahmed Khan, aged 57 years old, has been producing plastic sacks for
20 years. About 8 years ago, he realised that plastic waste was a real
problem. Polyblend, a fine powder of recycled modified plastic, was
developed then by his company. This mixture is mixed with the bitumen
that is used to lay roads. In collaboration with R.V.College of Engineering
and the Bangalore City Corporation, Ahmed Khan proved that blends of
Polyblend and bitumen, when used to lay roads, enhanced the bitumen’s
water repellant properties, and helped to increase road life by a factor of
three. The raw material for creating Polyblend is any plastic film waste.
So, against the price of Rs. 0.40 per kg that rag pickers had been getting
for plastic waste, Khan now offers Rs.6. Using Khan’s technique, by the
year 2002, more than 40 kms of road in Bangalore has already been
laid. At this rate, Khan will soon be running short of plastic waste in
Bangalore, to produce Polyblend. Thanks to innovations like Polyblend,
we might still avoid being smothered by plastic waste.
16.4 A GRO - CHEMICALS
AND THEIR
E FFECTS
In the wake of green revolution, use of inorganic fertilisers and pesticides
has increased manifold for enhancing crop production. Pesticides,
herbicides, fungicides, etc., are being increasingly used. These incidentally,
are also toxic to non-target organisms,that are important components of
the soil ecosystem. Do you think these can be biomagnified in the terrestrial
ecosystems? We know what the addition of increasing amounts of
chemical fertilisers can do to aquatic ecosystems vis-à-vis eutrophication.
The current problems in agriculture are, therefore, extremely grave.
279BIOLOGY
16.4.1 Case Study of Organic Farming
Integrated organic farming is a cyclical, zero-waste procedure, where waste
products from one process are cycled in as nutrients for other processes.
This allows the maximum utilisation of resource and increases the
efficiency of production. Ramesh Chandra Dagar, a farmer in Sonipat,
Haryana, is doing just this. He includes bee-keeping, dairy management,
water harvesting, composting and agriculture in a chain of processes,
which support each other and allow an extremely economical and
sustainable venture. There is no need to use chemical fertilisers for crops,
as cattle excreta (dung) are used as manure. Crop waste is used to create
compost, which can be used as a natural fertiliser or can be used to
generate natural gas for satisfying the energy needs of the farm.
Enthusiastic about spreading information and help on the practice of
integrated organic farming, Dagar has created the Haryana Kisan Welfare
Club, with a current membership of 5000 farmers.
16.5 R ADIOACTIVE W ASTES
Initially, nuclear energy was hailed as a non-polluting way for generating
electricity. Later on, it was realised that the use of nuclear energy has two
very serious inherent problems. The first is accidental leakage, as occurred
in the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl incidents and the second is safe
disposal of radioactive wastes.
Radiation, that is given off by nuclear waste is extremely damaging to
organisms, because it causes mutations at a very high rate. At high doses,
nuclear radiation is lethal but at lower doses, it creates various disorders,
the most frequent of all being cancer. Therefore, nuclear waste is an
extremely potent pollutant and has to be dealt with utmost caution.
It has been recommended that storage of nuclear waste, after
sufficient pre-treatment, should be done in suitably shielded
containers buried within the rocks, about 500 m deep below the
earth’s surface. However, this method of disposal is meeting stiff
opposition from the public. Why do you think this method of
disposal is not agreeable to many people?
16.6 G REENHOUSE E FFECT
280
AND
G LOBAL W ARMING
The term ‘Greenhouse effect’ has been derived from a phenomenon that
occurs in a greenhouse. Have you ever seen a greenhouse? It looks like a
small glass house and is used for growing plants especially during winter.
In a greenhouse the glass panel lets the light in, but does not allow heat
to escape. Therefore, the greenhouse warms up, very much like inside a
car that has been parked in the sun for a few hours.
The greenhouse effect is a naturally occurring phenomenon that is
responsible for heating of Earth’s surface and atmosphere. You would beENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
Figure 16.6 Sunlight energy at the outermost atmosphere
surprised to know that without greenhouse effect the average temperature
at surface of Earth would have been a chilly –18 o C rather than the present
average of 15 o C. In order to understand the
greenhouse effect, it is necessary to know the
fate of the energy of sunlight that reaches the
outermost atmosphere (Figure16.6). Clouds
and gases reflect about one-fourth of the
incoming solar radiation, and absorb some of
it but almost half of incoming solar radiation
falls on Earth’s surface heating it, while a small
proportion is reflected back. Earth’s surface
re-emits heat in the form of infrared radiation
but part of this does not escape into space as
atmospheric gases (e.g., carbon dioxide,
methane, etc.) absorb a major fraction of it. The
Figure 16.7 Relative contribution of various
molecules of these gases radiate heat energy,
greenhouse gases to total global
and a major part of which again comes to
warming
Earth’s surface, thus heating it up once again.
This cycle is repeated many a times. The
281
above-mentioned gases – carbon dioxide and methane – are commonly
known as greenhouse gases (Figure 16.7) because they are responsible
for the greenhouse effect.
Increase in the level of greenhouse gases has led to considerable heating
of Earth leading to global warming. During the past century, the
temperature of Earth has increased by 0.6 o C, most of it during the lastBIOLOGY
three decades. Scientists believe that this rise in temperature is leading
to deleterious changes in the environment and resulting in odd climatic
changes (e.g. El Nino effect) , thus leading to increased melting of polar
ice caps as well as of other places like the Himalayan snow caps. Over
many years, this will result in a rise in sea level that can submerge many
coastal areas. The total spectrum of changes that global warming can
bring about is a subject that is still under active research.
How can we control global warming? The measures include cutting
down use of fossil fuel, improving efficiency of energy usage, reducing
deforestation, planting trees and slowing down the growth of human
population. International initiatives are also being taken to reduce the
emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
16.7 O ZONE D EPLETION
IN THE
S TRATO -
SPHERE
You have earlier studied in the Chemistry
textbook of Class XI about ‘bad’ ozone, formed
in the lower atmosphere (troposphere) that harms
plants and animals. There is ‘good’ ozone also;
this ozone is found in the upper part of the
atmosphere called the stratosphere, and it acts
as a shield absorbing ultraviolet radiation from
the sun. UV rays are highly injurious to living
organisms since DNA and proteins of living
organisms preferentially absorb UV rays, and its
high energy breaks the chemical bonds within
these molecules. The thickness of the ozone in a
Figure 16.8 Ozone hole is the area above
column of air from the ground to the top of the
Antarctica, shown in purple
atmosphere is measured in terms of Dobson
colour, where the ozone layer
units (DU).
is the thinnest. Ozone
Ozone gas is continuously formed by the
thickness is given in Dobson
action of UV rays on molecular oxygen, and also
unit (see carefully the scale
shown in colour violet to red).
degraded into molecular oxygen in the
The ozone hole over Antarctica
stratosphere. There should be a balance between
develops each year between
production and degradation of ozone in the
late August and early
stratosphere. Of late, the balance has been
October. Courtesy: NASA
disrupted due to enhancement of ozone
degradation by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
282
CFCs find wide use as refrigerants. CFCs discharged in the lower part of
atmosphere move upward and reach stratosphere. In stratosphere, UV
rays act on them releasing Cl atoms. Cl degrades ozone releasing
molecular oxygen, with these atoms acting merely as catalysts; Cl atoms
are not consumed in the reaction. Hence, whatever CFCs are added to
the stratosphere, they have permanent and continuing affects on OzoneENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
levels. Although ozone depletion is occurring widely in the stratosphere,
the depletion is particularly marked over the Antarctic region. This has
resulted in formation of a large area of thinned ozone layer, commonly
called as the ozone hole (Figure 16.8).
UV radiation of wavelengths shorter than UV-B, are almost completely
absorbed by Earth’s atmosphere, given that the ozone layer is intact. But,
UV-B damages DNA and mutation may occur. It causes aging of skin,
damage to skin cells and various types of skin cancers. In human eye,
cornea absorbs UV-B radiation, and a high dose of UV-B causes
inflammation of cornea, called snow-blindness, cataract, etc. Such
exposure may permanently damage the cornea.
Recognising the deleterious affects of ozone depletion, an international
treaty, known as the Montreal Protocol, was signed at Montreal (Canada)
in 1987 (effective in 1989) to control the emission of ozone depleting
substances. Subsequently many more efforts have been made and
protocols have laid down definite roadmaps, separately for developed and
developing countries, for reducing the emission of CFCs and other ozone
depleting chemicals.
16.8 D EGRADATION BY I MPROPER R ESOURCE U TILISATION
AND M AINTENANCE
The degradation of natural resources can occur, not just by the action of
pollutants but also by improper resource utilisation practices.
Soil erosion and desertification: The development of the fertile top-soil
takes centuries. But, it can be removed very easily due to human activities
like over-cultivation, unrestricted grazing, deforestation and poor
irrigation practices, resulting in arid patches of land. When large barren
patches extend and meet over time, a desert is created. Internationally, it
has been recognised that desertification is a major problem nowadays,
particularly due to increased urbanisation.
Waterlogging and soil salinity: Irrigation without proper drainage of
water leads to waterlogging in the soil. Besides affecting the crops,
waterlogging draws salt to the surface of the soil. The salt then is deposited
as a thin crust on the land surface or starts collecting at the roots of the
plants. This increased salt content is inimical to the growth of crops and
is extremely damaging to agriculture. Waterlogging and soil salinity are
some of the problems that have come in the wake of the Green Revolution.
16.9 D EFORESTATION
Deforestation is the conversion of forested areas to non-forested ones.
According to an estimate, almost 40 per cent forests have been lost in the
tropics, compared to only 1 per cent in the temperate region. The present
scenario of deforestation is particularly grim in India. At the beginning of
283BIOLOGY
the twentieth century, forests covered about 30 per cent of the land of
India. By the end of the century, it shrunk to 19.4 per cent, whereas the
National Forest Policy (1988) of India has recommended 33 per cent forest
cover for the plains and 67 per cent for the hills.
How does deforestation occur? A number of human activities
contribute to it. One of the major reasons is the conversion of forest to
agricultural land so as to feed the growing human population. Trees are
axed for timber, firewood, cattle ranching and for several other purposes.
Slash and burn agriculture, commonly called as Jhum cultivation in
the north-eastern states of India, has also contributed to deforestation.
In slash and burn agriculture, the farmers cut down the trees of the forest
and burn the plant remains. The ash is used as a fertiliser and the land is
then used for farming or cattle grazing. After cultivation, the area is left
for several years so as to allow its recovery. The farmers then move on to
other areas and repeat this process. In earlier days, when Jhum cultivation
was in prevalence, enough time-gap was given such that the land recovered
from the effect of cultivation. With increasing population, and repeated
cultivation, this recovery phase is done away with, resulting in
deforestation.
What are the consequences of deforestation? One of the major effects
is enhanced carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere because
trees that could hold a lot of carbon in their biomass are lost with
deforestation. Deforestation also causes loss of biodiversity due to habitat
destruction, disturbs hydrologic cycle, causes soil erosion, and may lead
to desertification in extreme cases.
Reforestation is the process of restoring a forest that once existed
but was removed at some point of time in the past. Reforestation may
occur naturally in a deforested area. However, we can speed it up by
planting trees with due consideration to biodiversity that earlier existed
in that area.
16.9.1 Case Study of People’s Participation in
Conservation of Forests
284
People’s participation has a long history in India. In 1731, the king of
Jodhpur in Rajasthan asked one of his ministers to arrange wood for
constructing a new palace. The minister and workers went to a forest
near a village, inhabited by Bishnois, to cut down trees. The Bishnoi
community is known for its peaceful co-existence with nature. The effort
to cut down trees by the kings was thwarted by the Bishnois. A Bishnoi
woman Amrita Devi showed exemplary courage by hugging a tree and
daring king’s men to cut her first before cutting the tree. The tree mattered
much more to her than her own life. Sadly, the king’s men did not heed to
her pleas, and cut down the tree along with Amrita Devi. Her three
daughters and hundreds of other Bishnois followed her, and thus lost
their lives saving trees. Nowhere in history do we find a commitment ofENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
this magnitude when human beings sacrificed their lives for the cause of
the environment. The Government of India has recently instituted the
Amrita Devi Bishnoi Wildlife Protection Award for individuals or
communities from rural areas that have shown extraordinary courage
and dedication in protecting wildlife.
You may have heard of the Chipko Movement of Garhwal Himalayas.
In 1974, local women showed enormous bravery in protecting trees from
the axe of contractors by hugging them. People all over the world have
acclaimed the Chipko movement.
Realising the significance of participation by local communities,
the Government of India in 1980s has introduced the concept of
Joint Forest Management (JFM) so as to work closely with the local
communities for protecting and managing forests. In return for their
services to the forest, the communities get benefit of various forest products
(e.g., fruits, gum, rubber, medicine, etc.), and thus the forest can be
conserved in a sustainable manner.
SUMMARY
Major issues relating to environmental pollution and depletion of
valuable natural resources vary in dimension from local, regional to
global levels. Air pollution primarily results from burning of fossil fuel,
e.g., coal and petroleum, in industries and in automobiles. They are
harmful to humans, animals and plants, and therefore must be removed
to keep our air clean. Domestic sewage, the most common source of
pollution of water bodies, reduces dissolved oxygen but increases
biochemical oxygen demand of receiving water. Domestic sewage is rich
in nutrients, especially, nitrogen and phosphorus, which cause
eutrophication and nuisance algal blooms. Industrial waste waters are
often rich in toxic chemicals, especially heavy metals and organic
compounds. Industrial waste waters harm living organisms. Municipal
solid wastes also create problems and must be disposed off in landfills.
Disposal of hazardous wastes like defunct ships, radioactive wastes
and e-wastes requires additional efforts. Soil pollution primarily results
from agricultural chemicals (e.g., pesticides) and leachates from solid
wastes deposited over it.
Two major environmental issues of global nature are increasing
greenhouse effect, which is warming Earth, and depletion of ozone in
the stratosphere. Enhanced greenhouse effect is mainly due to
increased emission of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and CFCs.,
and also due to deforestation. It may drastically change rainfall pattern,
global temperature, besides deleteriously affecting living organisms.
Ozone in the stratosphere, which protects us from harmful effects of
ultraviolet radiation, is depleting fast due to emission of CFCs thus
increasing the risks of skin cancer, mutation and other disorders.
285BIOLOGY
EXERCISES
1. What are the various constituents of domestic sewage? Discuss the
effects of sewage discharge on a river.
2. List all the wastes that you generate, at home, school or during your
trips to other places. Could you very easily reduce the generation of
these wastes? Which would be difficult or rather impossible to reduce?
3. Discuss the causes and effects of global warming. What measures need
to be taken to control global warming?
4. Match the items given in column A and B:
Column A
(a) Catalytic converter
Column B
(i) Particulate matter
(b) Electrostatic precipitator (ii) Carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides
5.
(c) Earmuffs (iii) High noise level
(d) Landfills (iv) Solid wastes
Write critical notes on the following:
(a) Eutrophication
(b) Biological magnification
(c) Groundwater depletion and ways for its replenishment
6. Why does ozone hole form over Antarctica? How will enhanced ultraviolet
radiation affect us?
7. Discuss the role of women and communities in protection and
conservation of forests.
8. What measures, as an individual, would you take to reduce
environmental pollution?
9. Discuss briefly the following:
(a) Radioactive wastes
(b) Defunct ships and e-wastes
(c) Municipal solid wastes
10. What initiatives were taken for reducing vehicular air pollution in Delhi?
Has air quality improved in Delhi?
11. Discuss briefly the following :
(a) Greenhouse gases
(b) Catalytic converter
(c) Ultraviolet B
286
