Unit
1
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• describe general characteristics of
solid state;
• distinguish between amorphous
and crystalline solids;
• classify crystalline solids on the
basis of the nature of binding
forces;
• define crystal lattice and unit cell;
• explain close packing of particles;
• describe different types of voids
and close packed structures;
• calculate the packing efficiency of
different types of cubic unit cells;
• correlate the density of a
substance with its unit cell
properties;
• describe the imperfections in
solids and their effect on
properties;
• correlate the electrical and
magnetic properties of solids and
their structure.
The Solid Stat
State e
The vast majority of solid substances like high temperature
superconductors, biocompatible plastics, silicon chips, etc. are destined
to play an ever expanding role in future development of science.
We are mostly surrounded by solids and we use them
more often than liquids and gases. For different
applications we need solids with widely different
properties. These properties depend upon the nature of
constituent particles and the binding forces operating
between them. Therefore, study of the structure of solids
is important. The correlation between structure and
properties helps in discovering new solid materials
with desired properties like high temperature
superconductors, magnetic materials, biodegradable
polymers for packaging, biocompliant solids for surgical
implants, etc.
From our earlier studies, we know that liquids and
gases are called fluids because of their ability to flow.
The fluidity in both of these states is due to the fact that
the molecules are free to move about. On the contrary,
the constituent particles in solids have fixed positions
and can only oscillate about their mean positions. This
explains the rigidity in solids. In crystalline solids, the
constituent particles are arranged in regular patterns.
In this Unit, we shall discuss different possible
arrangements of particles resulting in several types of
structures. The correlation between the nature of
interactions within the constituent particles and several
properties of solids will also be explored. How these
properties get modified due to the structural
imperfections or by the presence of impurities in minute
amounts would also be discussed.1.1 General
Characteristics
of Solid State
1.2 Amorphous
and Crystalline
Solids
In Class XI you have learnt that matter can exist in three states namely,
solid, liquid and gas. Under a given set of conditions of temperature and
pressure, which of these would be the most stable state of a given
substance depends upon the net effect of two opposing factors.
Intermolecular forces tend to keep the molecules (or atoms or ions) closer,
whereas thermal energy tends to keep them apart by making them move
faster. At sufficiently low temperature, the thermal energy is low and
intermolecular forces bring them so close that they cling to one another
and occupy fixed positions. These can still oscillate about their mean
positions and the substance exists in solid state. The following are the
characteristic properties of the solid state:
(i) They have definite mass, volume and shape.
(ii) Intermolecular distances are short.
(iii) Intermolecular forces are strong.
(iv) Their constituent particles (atoms, molecules or ions) have fixed
positions and can only oscillate about their mean positions.
(v) They are incompressible and rigid.
Solids can be classified as crystalline or amorphous on the basis of the
nature of order present in the arrangement of their constituent particles.
A crystalline solid usually consists of a large number of small crystals,
each of them having a definite characteristic geometrical shape. In a crystal,
the arrangement of constituent particles (atoms, molecules or ions) is
ordered. It has long range order which means that there is a regular pattern
of arrangement of particles which repeats itself periodically over the entire
crystal. Sodium chloride and quartz are typical examples of crystalline
solids. An amorphous solid (Greek amorphos = no form) consists of particles
of irregular shape. The arrangement of constituent particles (atoms,
molecules or ions) in such a solid has only short range order. In such an
arrangement, a regular and periodically repeating pattern is observed over
short distances only. Such portions
are scattered and in between the
arrangement is disordered. The
structures of quartz (crystalline) and
quartz glass (amorphous) are shown
in Fig. 1.1 (a) and (b) respectively.
While the two structures are almost
identical, yet in the case of
amorphous quartz glass there is no
long range order. The structure of
amorphous solids is similar to that
of liquids. Glass, rubber and plastics
are typical examples of amorphous
solids. Due to the differences in the
arrangement of the constituent
Fig. 1.1: Two dimensional structure of
particles, the two types of solids differ
(a) quartz and (b) quartz glass
in their properties.
Chemistry
2Crystalline solids have a sharp melting point. On the other hand,
amorphous solids soften over a range of temperature and can be
moulded and blown into various shapes. On heating they become
crystalline at some temperature. Some glass objects from ancient
civilisations are found to become milky in
appearance because of some crystallisation. Like
B
liquids,
amorphous solids have a tendency to flow,
D
though very slowly. Therefore, sometimes these are
called pseudo solids or super cooled liquids. Glass
panes fixed to windows or doors of old buildings
are invariably found to be slightly thicker at the
bottom than at the top. This is because the glass
flows down very slowly and makes the bottom
portion slightly thicker.
Crystalline solids are anisotropic in nature, that
is, some of their physical properties like electrical
resistance or refractive index show different values
A
C
when measured along different directions in the same
crystals. This arises from different arrangement of
Fig. 1.2: Anisotropy in crystals is due
particles in different directions. This is illustrated in
to different arrangement of
Fig. 1.2. Since the arrangement of particles is different
particles along different
along different directions, the value of same physical
directions.
property is found to be different along each direction.
Amorphous solids on the other hand are isotropic
in nature. It is because there is no long range order in them and
arrangement is irregular along all the directions. Therefore, value of
any physical property would be same along any direction. These
differences are summarised in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Distinction between Crystalline and Amorphous Solids
Property
Shape
Melting point
Crystalline solids
Amorphous solids
Definite characteristic geometrical shape Irregular shape
Melt at a sharp and characteristic Gradually soften over a range of
temperature
temperature
Anisotropy When cut with a sharp edged tool, they When cut with a sharp edged tool, they
split into two pieces and the newly cut into two pieces with irregular
generated surfaces are plain and surfaces
smooth
They have a definite and characteristic They do not have definite heat of fusion
heat of fusion
Isotropic in nature
Anisotropic in nature
Nature True solids
Pseudo solids or super cooled liquids
Order in
arrangement
of constituent
particles Long range order
Only short range order.
Cleavage
property
Heat of fusion
3
The Solid StateAmorphous solids are useful materials. Glass, rubber and plastics
find many applications in our daily lives. Amorphous silicon is one of the
best photovoltaic material available for conversion of sunlight into electricity.
Intext Questions
1.1 Why are solids rigid?
1.2 Why do solids have a definite volume?
1.3 Classify the following as amorphous or crystalline solids: Polyurethane,
naphthalene, benzoic acid, teflon, potassium nitrate, cellophane, polyvinyl
chloride, fibre glass, copper.
1.4 Why is glass considered a super cooled liquid?
1.5 Refractive index of a solid is observed to have the same value along all directions.
Comment on the nature of this solid. Would it show cleavage property?
1 . 3 Classification
of Crystalline
Solids In Section 1.2, we have learnt about amorphous substances and that
they have only short range order. However, most of the solid substances
are crystalline in nature. For example, all the metallic elements like iron,
copper and silver; non – metallic elements like sulphur, phosphorus and
iodine and compounds like sodium chloride, zinc sulphide and
naphthalene form crystalline solids.
Crystalline solids can be classified on the basis of nature of
intermolecular forces operating in them into four categories viz.,
molecular, ionic, metallic and covalent solids. Let us now learn about
these categories.
1.3.1 Molecular
Solids Molecules are the constituent particles of molecular solids. These are
further sub divided into the following categories:
(i) Non polar Molecular Solids: They comprise of either atoms, for
example, argon and helium or the molecules formed by non polar
covalent bonds for example H 2 , Cl 2 and I 2 . In these solids, the atoms
or molecules are held by weak dispersion forces or London forces
about which you have learnt in Class XI. These solids are soft and
non-conductors of electricity. They have low melting points and are
usually in liquid or gaseous state at room temperature and pressure.
(ii) Polar Molecular Solids: The molecules of substances like HCl, SO 2,
etc. are formed by polar covalent bonds. The molecules in such
solids are held together by relatively stronger dipole-dipole
interactions. These solids are soft and non-conductors of electricity.
Their melting points are higher than those of non polar molecular
solids yet most of these are gases or liquids under room
temperature and pressure. Solid SO 2 and solid NH 3 are some
examples of such solids.
(iii) Hydrogen Bonded Molecular Solids: The molecules of such solids
contain polar covalent bonds between H and F, O or N atoms.
Strong hydrogen bonding binds molecules of such solids like H 2 O
(ice). They are non-conductors of electricity. Generally they are
volatile liquids or soft solids under room temperature and pressure.
Chemistry
41.3.2 Ionic Solids Ions are the constituent particles of ionic solids. Such solids are formed
by the three dimensional arrangements of cations and anions bound
by strong coulombic (electrostatic) forces. These solids are hard and
brittle in nature. They have high melting and boiling points. Since the
ions are not free to move about, they are electrical insulators in the
solid state. However, in the molten state or when dissolved in water,
the ions become free to move about and they conduct electricity.
1.3.3 Metallic
Solids Metals are orderly collection of positive ions surrounded by and held
together by a sea of free electrons. These electrons are mobile and are
evenly spread out throughout the crystal. Each metal atom contributes
one or more electrons towards this sea of mobile electrons. These free
and mobile electrons are responsible for high electrical and thermal
conductivity of metals. When an electric field is applied, these electrons
flow through the network of positive ions. Similarly, when heat is
supplied to one portion of a metal, the thermal energy is uniformly
spread throughout by free electrons. Another important characteristic
of metals is their lustre and colour in certain cases. This is also due
to the presence of free electrons in them. Metals are highly malleable
and ductile.
1.3.4 Covalent or
Network
Solids
A wide variety of crystalline solids of non-metals result from the
formation of covalent bonds between adjacent atoms throughout the
crystal. They are also called giant molecules. Covalent bonds are
strong and directional in nature, therefore atoms are held very strongly
at their positions. Such solids are very hard and brittle. They have
extremely high melting points and may even decompose before melting.
They are insulators and do not conduct electricity. Diamond (Fig. 1.3)
and silicon carbide are
typical examples of such
solids. Graphite is soft and
a conductor of electricity. Its
exceptional properties are
due to its typical structure
(Fig. 1.4). Carbon atoms are
arranged in different layers
and each atom is covalently
bonded to three of its
neighbouring atoms in the
same layer. The fourth
valence electron of each
atom is present between
different layers and is free
to move about. These free
electrons make graphite
a good conductor of
electricity. Different layers
can slide one over the other.
This makes graphite a soft
Fig. 1.3: Network structure
Fig. 1.4: Structure of graphite
solid and a good solid
of diamond
lubricant.
5
The Solid StateThe different properties of the four types of solids are listed in
Table 1.2.
Table 1.2: Different Types of Solids
Type of Solid
(1) Molecular solids
(i) Non polar
Constituent
Particles
Molecules
Bonding/
Attractive
Forces
Dispersion or
Examples Physical
Nature Electrical
Conduc-
tivity Melting
Point
Ar, CCl 4 , Soft Insulator Very low
London forces H 2 , I 2 , CO 2
(ii) Polar
(iii) Hydrogen
bonded
Dipole-dipole
interactions HCl, SO 2 Soft Insulator Low
Hydrogen
bonding H 2 O (ice) Hard Insulator Low
(2) Ionic solids Ions
Coulombic or NaCl, MgO, Hard but
electrostatic ZnS, CaF 2 brittle
(3) Metallic solids Positive
Metallic
ions in a
bonding
sea of
delocalised
electrons Fe, Cu, Ag, Hard but
Mg
malleable
and
ductile Conductors Fairly
in solid
high
state as
well as in
molten
state
(4) Covalent or
network solids Atoms SiO 2
Hard
(quartz),
SiC, C
(diamond),
AlN,
C (graphite)
Soft Insulators
Covalent
bonding
Insulators High
in solid
state but
conductors
in molten
state and
in aqueous
solutions
Very
high
Conductor
(exception)
Intext Questions
1.6 Classify the following solids in different categories based on the nature of
intermolecular forces operating in them:
Potassium sulphate, tin, benzene, urea, ammonia, water, zinc sulphide,
graphite, rubidium, argon, silicon carbide.
1.7 Solid A is a very hard electrical insulator in solid as well as in molten state
and melts at extremely high temperature. What type of solid is it?
1.8 Ionic solids conduct electricity in molten state but not in solid state. Explain.
1.9 What type of solids are electrical conductors, malleable and ductile?
Chemistry
61 . 4 Crystal
Lattices and
Unit Cells
The main characteristic of crystalline
solids is a regular and repeating
pattern of constituent particles. If
the three dimensional arrangement
of constituent particles in a crystal
is represented diagrammatically, in
which each particle is depicted as a
point, the arrangement is called
crystal lattice. Thus, a regular three
dimensional arrangement of points
in space is called a crystal lattice.
Fig. 1.5: A portion of a three
A portion of a crystal lattice is shown
dimensional cubic lattice
and its unit cell.
in Fig. 1.5.
There are only 14 possible three dimensional lattices. These are called
Bravais Lattices (after the French mathematician who first described
them). The following are the characteristics of a crystal lattice:
(a) Each point in a lattice is called lattice point or lattice site.
(b) Each point in a crystal lattice represents one constituent particle which
may be an atom, a molecule (group of atoms) or an ion.
(c) Lattice points are joined by straight lines to bring out the geometry of
the lattice.
Unit cell is the smallest portion of a crystal lattice
which, when repeated in different directions, generates
the entire lattice.
A unit cell is characterised by:
(i) its dimensions along the three edges, a, b and c. These
edges may or may not be mutually perpendicular.
(ii) angles between the edges, α (between b and c) β (between
a and c) and γ (between a and b). Thus, a unit cell is
characterised by six parameters, a, b, c, α, β and γ.
These parameters of a typical unit cell are shown in
Fig. 1.6: Illustration of
parameters of a unit cell
Fig. 1.6.
1.4.1 Primitive
and Centred
Unit Cells
Unit cells can be broadly divided into two categories, primitive and
centred unit cells.
(a) Primitive Unit Cells
When constituent particles are present only on the corner positions of
a unit cell, it is called as primitive unit cell.
(b) Centred Unit Cells
When a unit cell contains one or more constituent particles present at
positions other than corners in addition to those at corners, it is called
a centred unit cell. Centred unit cells are of three types:
(i) Body-Centred Unit Cells: Such a unit cell contains one constituent
particle (atom, molecule or ion) at its body-centre besides the ones
that are at its corners.
(ii) Face-Centred Unit Cells: Such a unit cell contains one constituent
particle present at the centre of each face, besides the ones that
are at its corners.
7
The Solid State(iii) End-Centred Unit Cells: In such a unit cell, one constituent particle
is present at the centre of any two opposite faces besides the ones
present at its corners.
In all, there are seven types of primitive unit cells (Fig. 1.7).
Fig. 1.7: Seven primitive unit cells in crystals
Their characteristics along with the centred unit cells they can form
have been listed in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3: Seven Primitive Unit Cells and their Possible
Variations as Centred Unit Cells
Crystal system
Possible
variations
Axial distances
or edge lengths
Axial angles Examples
Cubic Primitive,
Body-centred,
Face-centred a = b = c α = β = γ = 90° NaCl, Zinc blende,
Cu
Tetragonal Primitive,
Body-centred a = b ≠ c α = β = γ = 90° White tin, SnO 2 ,
TiO 2 , CaSO 4
Orthorhombic Primitive,
Body-centred,
Face-centred,
End-centred a ≠ b ≠ c α = β = γ = 90° Rhombic sulphur,
KNO 3 , BaSO 4
Hexagonal Primitive a = b ≠ c α = β = 90°
γ = 120° Graphite, ZnO,CdS,
Rhombohedral or
Trigonal Primitive a = b = c α = β = γ ≠ 90° Calcite (CaCO 3 ), HgS
(cinnabar)
Chemistry
8Monoclinic Primitive,
End-centred a ≠ b ≠ c α = γ = 90°
β ≠ 90° Monoclinic sulphur,
Na 2 SO 4 .10H 2 O
Triclinic Primitive a ≠ b ≠ c α ≠ β ≠ γ ≠ 90° K 2 Cr 2 O 7 , CuSO 4 . 5H 2 O,
H 3 BO 3
Unit Cells of 14 Types of Bravais Lattices
a
a
a
Primitive
(or simple)
Body-centred
Face-centred
The three cubic lattices: all sides of same
length, angles between faces all 90°
Primitive
Body-centred
The two tetragonal: one side different in length to the other,
two angles between faces all 90°
Primitive
End-centred
Body-centred
Face-centred
The four orthorhombic lattices: unequal sides, angles
between faces all 90°
More than
90°
Less than
90°
Primitive
End-centred
The two monoclinic lattices: unequal sides,
two faces have angles different from 90°
9
The Solid Statea
a
60
a
less than 90°
Rhombohedral lattice –
all sides of equal
length, angles on two
faces are less than 90°
Hexagonal lattice –
one side different in
length to the other
two, the marked
angles on two faces
are 60°
b
a
a
A
B
c
1 . 5 Number of
Atoms in a
Unit Cell
C
Triclinic lattice –
unequal sides a, b, c,
A, B, C are unequal
angles with none equal to 90°
We know that any crystal lattice is made up of a very large number of
unit cells and every lattice point is occupied by one constituent particle
(atom, molecule or ion). Let us now work out what portion of each particle
belongs to a particular unit cell.
We shall consider three types of cubic unit cells and for simplicity
assume that the constituent particle is an atom.
Primitive cubic unit cell has atoms only at its corner. Each atom at
a corner is shared between eight adjacent unit cells as shown in
Fig. 1.8, four unit cells in the same layer and four unit cells of the
1 th
upper (or lower) layer. Therefore, only
of an atom (or molecule
8
or ion) actually belongs to a particular unit cell. In
Fig. 1.9, a primitive cubic unit cell has been depicted
in three different ways. Each small sphere in Fig. 1.9 (a)
represents only the centre of the particle occupying
that position and not its actual size. Such structures
are called open structures. The arrangement of
particles is easier to follow in open structures.
Fig. 1.9 (b) depicts space-filling representation of the
unit cell with actual particle size and Fig. 1.9 (c) shows
the actual portions of different atoms present in a
cubic unit cell.
Fig. 1.8: In a simple cubic unit cell,
In all, since each cubic unit cell has
each corner atom is shared
8
atoms
on its corners, the total number of
between 8 unit cells.
1
atoms in one unit cell is 8 × = 1 atom.
8
1.5.1 Primitive
Cubic Unit
Cell
Fig. 1.9: A primitive cubic unit cell (a) open
structure (b) space-filling structure
(c) actual portions of atoms belonging
to one unit cell.
Chemistry
101.5.2 Body-
Centred
Cubic Unit
Cell
A body-centred cubic (bcc) unit cell has an atom at each of its corners
and also one atom at its body centre. Fig. 1.10 depicts (a) open
structure (b) space filling model and (c) the unit cell with portions of
atoms actually belonging to it. It can be seen that the atom at the
(b)
(a)
(c)
Fig. 1.10: A body-centred cubic unit cell (a) open structure (b) space-
filling structure (c) actual portions of atoms belonging to
one unit cell.
body centre wholly belongs to the unit cell in which it is present. Thus
in a body-centered cubic (bcc) unit cell:
1
1
(i) 8 corners ×
per corner atom = 8 ×
= 1 atom
8
8
(ii) 1 body centre atom = 1 × 1
= 1 atom
∴ Total number of atoms per unit cell
= 2 atoms
1.5.3 Face-
Centred
Cubic Unit
Cell
A face-centred cubic (fcc) unit cell contains atoms at all the corners and
at the centre of all the faces of the cube. It can be seen in Fig. 1.11 that
each atom located at the face-centre is shared between two adjacent
1
unit cells and only of each atom belongs to a unit cell. Fig. 1.12 depicts
2
(a) open structure (b) space-filling model and (c) the unit cell with
portions of atoms actually belonging to it. Thus, in a face-centred cubic
(fcc) unit cell:
1
1
(i) 8 corners atoms ×
atom per unit cell = 8 ×
= 1 atom
8
8
1
1
(ii) 6 face-centred atoms ×
atom per unit cell = 6 ×
= 3 atoms
2
2
∴ Total number of atoms per unit cell
= 4 atoms
Fig. 1.11: An atom at face
centre of unit cell
is shared between
2 unit cells
(a)
(b)
(b)
Fig 1.12: A face-centred cubic unit cell (a) open structure (b) space
filling structure (c) actual portions of atoms belonging to
one unit cell.
11
The Solid StateIntext Questions
1.10 Give the significance of a ‘lattice point’.
1.11 Name the parameters that characterise a unit cell.
1.12 Distinguish between
(i) Hexagonal and monoclinic unit cells
(ii) Face-centred and end-centred unit cells.
1.13 Explain how much portion of an atom located at (i) corner and (ii) body-
centre of a cubic unit cell is part of its neighbouring unit cell.
1.6 Close Packed
Structures
In solids, the constituent particles are close-packed, leaving the
minimum vacant space. Let us consider the constituent particles as
identical hard spheres and build up the three dimensional structure in
three steps.
(a) Close Packing in One Dimension
There is only one way of arranging spheres in a one dimensional close
packed structure, that is to arrange them in a row and touching each
other (Fig. 1.13).
In this arrangement, each sphere is in contact
with two of its neighbours. The number of nearest
neighbours of a particle is called its coordination
Fig. 1.13: Close packing of spheres in
number. Thus, in one dimensional close packed
one dimension
arrangement, the coordination number is 2.
(b) Close Packing in T wo Dimensions
Two dimensional close packed structure can be generated by stacking
(placing) the rows of close packed spheres. This can be done in two
different ways.
(i) The second row may be placed in contact with the first one such
that the spheres of the second row are exactly above those of the
first row. The spheres of the two rows are aligned horizontally as
well as vertically. If we call the first row as ‘A’ type row, the second
row being exactly the same as the first one, is also of ‘A’ type.
Similarly, we may place more rows to obtain AAA type of
arrangement as shown in Fig. 1.14 (a).
Fig. 1.14: (a) Square close packing (b) hexagonal close
packing of spheres in two dimensions
Chemistry
12In this arrangement, each sphere is in contact with four of its
neighbours. Thus, the two dimensional coordination number is 4. Also,
if the centres of these 4 immediate neighbouring spheres are joined, a
square is formed. Hence this packing is called square close packing
in two dimensions.
(ii) The second row may be placed above the first one in a staggered
manner such that its spheres fit in the depressions of the first row.
If the arrangement of spheres in the first row is called ‘A’ type, the
one in the second row is different and may be called ‘B’ type. When
the third row is placed adjacent to the second in staggered manner,
its spheres are aligned with those of the first layer. Hence this layer
is also of ‘A’ type. The spheres of similarly placed fourth row will
be aligned with those of the second row (‘B’ type). Hence this
arrangement is of ABAB type. In this arrangement there is less free
space and this packing is more efficient than the square close
packing. Each sphere is in contact with six of its neighbours and
the two dimensional coordination number is 6. The centres of these
six spheres are at the corners of a regular hexagon (Fig. 1.14b)
hence this packing is called two dimensional hexagonal close-
packing. It can be seen in Figure 1.14 (b) that in this layer there
are some voids (empty spaces). These are triangular in shape. The
triangular voids are of two different types. In one row, the apex of
the triangles are pointing upwards and in the next layer downwards.
(c) Close Packing in Three Dimensions
All real structures are three dimensional structures. They can be
obtained by stacking two dimensional layers one above the other. In
the last Section, we discussed close packing in two dimensions which
can be of two types; square close-packed and hexagonal close-packed.
Let us see what types of three dimensional close packing can be obtained
from these.
(i) Three dimensional close packing from two dimensional square
close-packed layers: While placing the second square close-packed
layer above the first we follow the same rule that was
followed when one row was placed adjacent to the other.
The second layer is placed over the first layer such that
the spheres of the upper layer are exactly above those of
the first layer. In this arrangement spheres of both the
layers are perfectly aligned horizontally as well as
vertically as shown in Fig. 1.15. Similarly, we may place
more layers one above the other. If the arrangement of
spheres in the first layer is called ‘A’ type, all the layers
have the same arrangement. Thus this lattice has AAA....
type pattern. The lattice thus generated is the simple
cubic lattice, and its unit cell is the primitive cubic unit
cell (See Fig. 1.9).
(ii) Three dimensional close packing from two
dimensional hexagonal close packed layers: Three
dimensional close packed structure can be generated
Fig. 1.15: Simple cubic lattice formed
by placing layers one over the other.
by A A A .... arrangement
13
The Solid State(a) Placing second layer over the first layer
Let us take a two dimensional hexagonal close packed layer ‘A’ and
place a similar layer above it such that the spheres of the second layer
are placed in the depressions of the first layer. Since the spheres of the
two layers are aligned differently, let us call the second layer as B. It
can be observed from Fig. 1.16 that not all the triangular voids of the
first layer are covered by the spheres of the second layer. This gives rise
to different arrangements. Wherever a sphere of the second layer is
above the void of the first layer (or vice versa) a tetrahedral void is
Fig. 1.16: A stack of two layers of close packed spheres and voids
generated in them. T = Tetrahedral void; O = Octahedral void
formed. These voids are called tetrahedral voids because a tetrahedron
is formed when the centres of these four spheres are joined. They have
been marked as ‘T’ in Fig. 1.16. One such void has been shown
separately in Fig. 1.17.
Fig 1.17
Tetrahedral and
octahedral voids
(a) top view
(b) exploded side
view and
(c) geometrical shape
of the void.
Chemistry
14At other places, the triangular voids in the second layer are above
the triangular voids in the first layer, and the triangular shapes of these
do not overlap. One of them has the apex of the triangle pointing
upwards and the other downwards. These voids have been marked as
‘O’ in Fig. 1.16. Such voids are surrounded by six spheres and are
called octahedral voids. One such void has been shown separately in
Fig. 1.17. The number of these two types of voids depend upon the
number of close packed spheres.
Let the number of close packed spheres be N, then:
The number of octahedral voids generated = N
The number of tetrahedral voids generated = 2N
(b) Placing third layer over the second layer
When third layer is placed over the second, there are two possibilities.
(i) Covering Tetrahedral Voids: Tetrahedral voids of the second layer
may be covered by the spheres of the third layer. In this case, the
spheres of the third layer are exactly aligned with those of the first
layer. Thus, the pattern of spheres is repeated in alternate layers.
This pattern is often written as ABAB ....... pattern. This structure
is called hexagonal close packed (hcp) structure (Fig. 1.18). This
sort of arrangement of atoms is found in many metals like
magnesium and zinc.
Fig. 1.18
(a) Hexagonal cubic
close-packing
exploded view
showing stacking of
layers of spheres
(b) four layers
stacked in each case
and (c) geometry of
packing.
Fig. 1.19
(a) ABCABC...
arrangement of
layers when
octahedral void is
covered (b) fragment
of structure formed
by this arrangement
resulting in cubic
closed packed (ccp)
or face centred cubic
(fcc) structure.
A
C
(b)
B
A
(a)
(ii) Covering Octahedral Voids: The
third layer may be placed above
the second layer in a manner such
that its spheres cover the
octahedral voids. When placed in
this manner, the spheres of the
third layer are not aligned with
those of either the first or the second
layer. This arrangement is called ‘C’
type. Only when fourth layer is
placed, its spheres are aligned with
15
The Solid Statethose of the first layer as shown in Figs. 1.18 and 1.19. This pattern
of layers is often written as ABCABC ........... This structure is called
cubic close packed (ccp) or face-centred cubic (fcc) structure. Metals
such as copper and silver crystallise in this structure.
Both these types of close packing are highly efficient and 74%
space in the crystal is filled. In either of them, each sphere is in contact
with twelve spheres. Thus, the coordination number is 12 in either of
these two structures.
1.6.1 Formula of a
Compound
and Number
of Voids
Filled
Earlier in the section, we have learnt that when particles are close-
packed resulting in either ccp or hcp structure, two types of voids are
generated. While the number of octahedral voids present in a lattice is
equal to the number of close packed particles, the number of tetrahedral
voids generated is twice this number. In ionic solids, the bigger ions
(usually anions) form the close packed structure and the smaller ions
(usually cations) occupy the voids. If the latter ion is small enough
then tetrahedral voids are occupied, if bigger, then octahedral voids.
Not all octahedral or tetrahedral voids are occupied. In a given
compound, the fraction of octahedral or tetrahedral voids that are
occupied, depends upon the chemical formula of the compound, as
can be seen from the following examples.
Example 1.1 A compound is formed by two elements X and Y. Atoms of the element
Y (as anions) make ccp and those of the element X (as cations) occupy
all the octahedral voids. What is the formula of the compound?
Solution The ccp lattice is formed by the element Y. The number of octahedral
voids generated would be equal to the number of atoms of Y present in
it. Since all the octahedral voids are occupied by the atoms of X, their
number would also be equal to that of the element Y. Thus, the atoms
of elements X and Y are present in equal numbers or 1:1 ratio. Therefore,
the formula of the compound is XY.
Example 1.2 Atoms of element B form hcp lattice and those of the element A occupy
2/3rd of tetrahedral voids. What is the formula of the compound formed
by the elements A and B?
Solution The number of tetrahedral voids formed is equal to twice the number of
atoms of element B and only 2/3rd of these are occupied by the atoms
of element A. Hence the ratio of the number of atoms of A and B is 2
× (2/3):1 or 4:3 and the formula of the compound is A 4 B 3 .
Locating Tetrahedral and Octahedral Voids
We know that close packed structures have both tetrahedral and octahedral
voids. Let us take ccp (or fcc) structure and locate these voids in it.
(a) Locating Tetrahedral Voids
Let us consider a unit cell of ccp or fcc lattice [Fig. 1(a)]. The unit cell is divided
into eight small cubes.
Chemistry
16Each small cube has atoms at alternate corners [Fig. 1(a)]. In all, each small
cube has 4 atoms. When joined to each other, they make a regular tetrahedron.
Thus, there is one tetrahedral void in each small cube and eight tetrahedral
voids in total. Each of the eight small cubes have one void in one unit cell of ccp
structure. We know that ccp structure has 4 atoms per unit cell. Thus, the
number of tetrahedral voids is twice the number of atoms.
Fig. 1: (a) Eight tetrahedral voids per unit cell of ccp structure
(b) one tetrahedral void showing the geometry.
(b) Locating Octahedral Voids
Let us again consider a unit cell of ccp or fcc lattice [Fig. 2(a)]. The body centre
of the cube, C is not occupied but it is surrounded by six atoms on face centres.
If these face centres are joined, an octahedron is generated. Thus, this unit cell
has one octahedral void at the body centre of the cube.
Besides the body centre, there is one octahedral void at the centre of each
of the 12 edges. [Fig. 2(b)]. It is surrounded by six atoms, four belonging to the
same unit cell (2 on the corners and 2 on face centre) and two belonging to two
adjacent unit cells. Since each edge of the cube is shared between four adjacent
unit cells, so is the octahedral void located on it. Only
1 th
of each void belongs
4
to a particular unit cell.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: Location of octahedral voids per unit cell of ccp or fcc lattice (a) at the body centre
of the cube and (b) at the centre of each edge (only one such void is shown).
17
The Solid StateThus in cubic close packed structure:
Octahedral void at the body-centre of the cube = 1
12 octahedral voids located at each edge and shared between four unit cells
= 12 ×
1
= 3
4
∴ Total number of octahedral voids = 4
We know that in ccp structure, each unit cell has 4 atoms. Thus, the number
of octahedral voids is equal to this number.
1.7 Packing
Efficiency In whatever way the constituent particles (atoms, molecules or ions)
are packed, there is always some free space in the form of voids.
Packing efficiency is the percentage of total space filled by the
particles. Let us calculate the packing efficiency in different types of
structures.
1.7.1 Packing
Efficiency in
hcp and ccp
Structures Both types of close packing (hcp and ccp) are equally efficient. Let us
calculate the efficiency of packing in ccp structure. In Fig. 1.20 let the
unit cell edge length be ‘a’ and face diagonal AC = b.
In ∆ ABC
AC 2 = b 2 = BC 2 + AB 2
= a 2 +a 2 = 2a 2 or
b =
2a
If r is the radius of the sphere, we find
b = 4r =
or a =
2a
4r
= 2 2r
2
(we can also write, r =
Fig. 1.20: Cubic close packing other
sides are not provided with
spheres for sake of clarity.
a
2 2
)
We know, that each unit cell in ccp structure,
has effectively 4 spheres. Total volume of four
spheres is equal to 4 × ( 4 /3 ) π r 3 and volume of the
(
3
cube is a or 2 2r
)
3
.
Therefore,
Packing efficiency =
=
=
Chemistry
18
Volume occupied by four spheres in the unit cell × 100
%
Total volumeof the unit cell
4 × ( 4 /3 ) π r 3 × 100
( 2
2r
)
3
( 16 /3 ) π r 3 × 100
16 2r 3
%
% = 74%1.7.2 Efficiency of
Packing in
Body-
Centred
Cubic
Structures
From Fig. 1.21, it is clear that the
atom at the centre will be in touch
with the other two atoms diagonally
arranged.
In ∆ EFD,
2
2
2
2
b = a + a = 2a
b =
2a
Now in ∆ AFD
2
2
2
2
2
2
c = a + b = a + 2a = 3a
c =
3a
The length of the body diagonal
c is equal to 4r, where r is the radius
of the sphere (atom), as all the three
spheres along the diagonal touch
each other.
Therefore,
Fig. 1.21: Body-centred cubic unit
cell (sphere along the
body diagonal are shown
with solid boundaries).
3a = 4r
a=
Also we can write, r =
4r
3
3
a
4
In this type of structure, total number of atoms is 2 and their volume
()
is 2 × 4 π r 3 .
3
3
3
 4 


3
r  or a 3 =  4 r  .
Volume of the cube, a will be equal to 
 3 
 3 
Therefore,
Packing efficiency =
=
=
1.7.3 Packing
Efficiency in
Simple Cubic
Lattice
Volume occupied by two spheres in the unit cell × 100
%
Total volume of the unit cell
2 × ( 4 / 3 ) π r 3 × 100
(
)
 4/ 3 r 


3
( 8/ 3 ) π r 3 × 100
(
)
64/ 3 3 r 3
%
% = 68%
In a simple cubic lattice the atoms are located only on the corners of the
cube. The particles touch each other along the edge (Fig. 1.22).
Thus, the edge length or side of the cube ‘a’, and the radius of each particle,
r are related as
a = 2r
The volume of the cubic unit cell = a 3 = (2r) 3 = 8r 3
Since a simple cubic unit cell contains only 1 atom
4 3
π r
The volume of the occupied space =
3
19
The Solid State∴ Packing efficiency
=
4 3
π r
π
= 3
× 100 = × 100
6
8r 3
= 52.36% = 52.4 %
Thus, we may conclude that ccp
and hcp structures have maximum
packing efficiency.
Fig. 1.22
Simple cubic unit cell.
The spheres are in
contact with each
other along the edge of
the cube.
1.8 Calculations
Involving
Unit Cell
Dimensions
Volume of one atom
× 100%
Volume of cubic unit cell
From the unit cell dimensions, it is possible to calculate the volume of
the unit cell. Knowing the density of the metal, we can calculate the
mass of the atoms in the unit cell. The determination of the mass of a
single atom gives an accurate method of determination of Avogadro
constant. Suppose, edge length of a unit cell of a cubic crystal determined
by X-ray diffraction is a, d the density of the solid substance and M the
molar mass. In case of cubic crystal:
3
Volume of a unit cell = a
Mass of the unit cell
= number of atoms in unit cell × mass of each atom = z × m
(Here z is the number of atoms present in one unit cell and m is the
mass of a single atom)
Mass of an atom present in the unit cell:
M
m = N (M is molar mass)
A
Therefore, density of the unit cell
mass of unit cell
volume of unit cell
z.m
z.M
zM
= 3 = 3
or d = 3
a
a .N A
a N A
=
Remember, the density of the unit cell is the same as the density of
the substance. The density of the solid can always be determined by
other methods. Out of the five parameters (d, z M, a and N A ), if any
four are known, we can determine the fifth.
Example 1.3 An element has a body-centred cubic (bcc) structure with a cell edge of
288 pm. The density of the element is 7.2 g/cm 3 . How many atoms are
present in 208 g of the element?
Solution Volume of the unit cell = (288 pm) 3
= (288×10 -12 m) 3 = (288×10 -10 cm) 3
= 2.39×10 -23 cm 3
Chemistry
20Volume of 208 g of the element
=
mass
208 g
=
= 28.88 cm 3
density 7.2 g cm − 3
Number of unit cells in this volume
=
28.88 cm 3
= 12.08×10 23 unit cells
2.39 × 10 − 23 cm 3 / unit cell
Since each bcc cubic unit cell contains 2 atoms, therefore, the total number
of atoms in 208 g = 2 (atoms/unit cell) × 12.08 × 10 23 unit cells
= 24.16×10 23 atoms
X-ray diffraction studies show that copper crystallises in an fcc unit
cell with cell edge of 3.608×10 -8 cm. In a separate experiment, copper is
determined to have a density of 8.92 g/cm 3 , calculate the atomic mass
of copper. Example 1.4
In case of fcc lattice, number of atoms per unit cell, z = 4 atoms Solution
Therefore, M =
dN A a
z
3
8.92 g cm –3 × 6.022 × 10 23 atoms mol − 1 × (3.608 × 10 − 8 cm) 3
4 atoms
= 63.1 g/mol
Atomic mass of copper = 63.1u
=
Silver forms ccp lattice and X-ray studies of its crystals show that the
edge length of its unit cell is 408.6 pm. Calculate the density of silver
(Atomic mass = 107.9 u). Example 1.5
Since the lattice is ccp, the number of silver atoms per unit cell = z = 4 Solution
–1
-3
–1
Molar mass of silver = 107.9 g mol = 107.9×10 kg mol
Edge length of unit cell = a = 408.6 pm = 408.6×10 –12 m
z.M
Density, d = a 3 .N
A
=
(
4 × 107.9 × 10 − 3 kg mol − 1
( 408.6 × 10
− 12
m
) ( 6.022 × 10
3
)
23
mol
− 1
)
= 10.5×10 3 kg m –3
-3
= 10.5 g cm
Intext Questions
1.14 What is the two dimensional coordination number of a molecule in
square close-packed layer?
1.15 A compound forms hexagonal close-packed structure. What is the total
number of voids in 0.5 mol of it? How many of these are tetrahedral voids?
21
The Solid State1.16 A compound is formed by two elements M and N. The element N
forms ccp and atoms of M occupy 1/3rd of tetrahedral voids. What
is the formula of the compound?
1.17 Which of the following lattices has the highest packing efficiency (i) simple
cubic (ii) body-centred cubic and (iii) hexagonal close-packed lattice?
1.18 An element with molar mass 2.7×10 -2 kg mol -1 forms a cubic unit cell
with edge length 405 pm. If its density is 2.7×10 3 kg m -3 , what is the
nature of the cubic unit cell?
1.9 Imperfections
in Solids Although crystalline solids have short range as well as long range
order in the arrangement of their constituent particles, yet crystals are
not perfect. Usually a solid consists of an aggregate of large number
of small crystals. These small crystals have defects in them. This
happens when crystallisation process occurs at fast or moderate rate.
Single crystals are formed when the process of crystallisation occurs at
extremely slow rate. Even these crystals are not free of defects. The
defects are basically irregularities in the arrangement of constituent
particles. Broadly speaking, the defects are of two types, namely, point
defects and line defects. Point defects are the irregularities or
deviations from ideal arrangement around a point or an atom in a
crystalline substance, whereas the line defects are the irregularities or
deviations from ideal arrangement in entire rows of lattice points. These
irregularities are called crystal defects. We shall confine our discussion
to point defects only.
1.9.1 Types of
Point Defects Point defects can be classified into three types : (i) stoichiometric defects
(ii) impurity defects and (iii) non-stoichiometric defects.
(a) Stoichiometric Defects
These are the point defects that do not disturb the stoichiometry of
the solid. They are also called intrinsic or thermodynamic defects.
Basically these are of two types, vacancy defects and interstitial defects.
(i) Vacancy Defect: When some of the lattice sites are vacant, the
crystal is said to have vacancy defect (Fig. 1.23). This results in
decrease in density of the substance. This defect can also develop
when a substance is heated.
(ii) Interstitial Defect: When some constituent particles
(atoms or molecules) occupy an interstitial site,
the crystal is said to have interstitial defect
(Fig. 1.24). This defect increases the density of the
substance.
Vacancy and interstitial defects as explained
above can be shown by non-ionic solids. Ionic
solids must always maintain electrical neutrality.
Rather than simple vacancy or interstitial
defects, they show these defects as Frenkel and
Schottky defects.
Fig. 1.23: Vacancy defects
Chemistry
22(iii) Frenkel Defect: This
defect is shown by ionic
solids. The smaller ion
(usually
cation)
is
dislocated from its normal
site to an interstitial site
(Fig. 1.25). It creates a
vacancy defect at its
original site and an
interstitial defect at its
new location.
Fig. 1.24: Interstitial defects
Frenkel defect is also
called dislocation defect.
It does not change the density of the solid. Frenkel defect is
shown by ionic substance in which there is a large difference in
the size of ions, for example, ZnS, AgCl, AgBr and AgI due to
small size of Zn 2+ and Ag + ions.
(iv) Schottky Defect: It is basically a vacancy defect in ionic solids. In
order to maintain electrical neutrality, the number of missing
cations and anions are equal (Fig. 1.26).
Like simple vacancy
defect, Schottky defect also
decreases the density of the
substance. Number of such
defects in ionic solids is quite
significant. For example, in
NaCl there are approximately
6
3
10 Schottky pairs per cm
at room temperature. In
3
1 cm there are about
22
10 ions. Thus, there is one
16
Schottky defect per 10 ions.
Fig. 1.25: Frenkel defects
Schottky defect is shown by
Fig. 1.26: Schottky defects
ionic substances in which the
cation and anion are of almost similar sizes.
For example, NaCl, KCl, CsCl and AgBr. It
may be noted that AgBr shows both, Frenkel
as well as Schottky defects.
(b) Impurity Defects
Fig. 1.27: Introduction of cation vacancy in
NaCl by substitution of Na + by Sr 2+
If molten NaCl containing a little amount
of SrCl 2 is crystallised, some of the sites of
Na + ions are occupied by Sr 2+ (Fig.1.27).
Each Sr 2+ replaces two Na + ions. It occupies
the site of one ion and the other site remains
vacant. The cationic vacancies thus
produced are equal in number to that of
Sr 2+ ions. Another similar example is the
solid solution of CdCl 2 and AgCl.
23
The Solid State(c) Non-Stoichiometric Defects
The defects discussed so far do not disturb the stoichiometry of
the crystalline substance. However, a large number of non-
stoichiometric inorganic solids are known which contain the
constituent elements in non-stoichiometric ratio due to defects in
their crystal structures. These defects are of two types: (i) metal
excess defect and (ii) metal deficiency defect.
(i) Metal Excess Defect
Ã
Metal excess defect due to anionic vacancies: Alkali halides
like NaCl and KCl show this type of defect. When crystals of
NaCl are heated in an atmosphere of sodium vapour, the
sodium atoms are deposited on the surface of the crystal.
The Cl – ions diffuse to the surface of the crystal and
combine with Na atoms to give NaCl. This happens by
loss of electron by sodium atoms to form Na + ions. The
released electrons diffuse into the crystal and occupy
anionic sites (Fig. 1.28). As a result the crystal now has
an excess of sodium. The anionic sites occupied by
unpaired electrons are called F-centres (from the German
word Farbenzenter for colour centre). They impart yellow
colour to the crystals of NaCl. The colour results by
excitation of these electrons when they absorb energy from
the visible light falling on the crystals. Similarly, excess of
lithium makes LiCl crystals pink and excess of potassium
Fig. 1.28: An F-centre in a crystal
makes KCl crystals violet (or lilac).
Ã
Metal excess defect due to the presence of extra cations at
interstitial sites: Zinc oxide is white in colour at room
temperature. On heating it loses oxygen and turns yellow.
1
heating
ZnO 
→ Zn 2 + + O 2 + 2e −
2
Now there is excess of zinc in the crystal and its formula becomes
2+
Zn 1+x O. The excess Zn ions move to interstitial sites and the electrons
to neighbouring interstitial sites.
(ii) Metal Deficiency Defect
There are many solids which are difficult to prepare in the
stoichiometric composition and contain less amount of the metal as
compared to the stoichiometric proportion. A typical example of
this type is FeO which is mostly found with a composition of Fe 0.95 O.
It may actually range from Fe 0.93 O to Fe 0.96 O. In crystals of FeO
some Fe 2+ cations are missing and the loss of positive charge is
made up by the presence of required number of Fe 3+ ions.
1.10 Electrical
Properties
Chemistry
24
Solids exhibit an amazing range of electrical conductivities, extending
–20
7
–1
–1
over 27 orders of magnitude ranging from 10
to 10 ohm m .
Solids can be classified into three types on the basis of their
conductivities.
(i) Conductors: The solids with conductivities ranging between 10 4
to 10 7 ohm –1 m –1 are called conductors. Metals have conductivities
in the order of 10 7 ohm –1 m –1 are good conductors.(ii) Insulators : These are the solids with very low conductivities
–20
–10
–1
–1
ranging between 10 to 10 ohm m .
(iii) Semiconductors : These are the solids with conductivities in the
–6
4
–1
–1
intermediate range from 10 to 10 ohm m .
1.10.1 Conduction
of
Electricity
in Metals A conductor may conduct electricity through movement of electrons or
ions. Metallic conductors belong to the former category and electrolytes
to the latter.
Metals conduct electricity in solid as well as molten state. The
conductivity of metals depend upon the number of valence electrons
available per atom. The atomic orbitals of metal atoms form molecular
orbitals which are so close in energy to each other as to form a
band. If this band is partially filled or it overlaps with a higher
energy unoccupied conduction band, then electrons can flow easily
under an applied electric field and the metal shows conductivity
(Fig. 1.29 a).
If the gap between filled valence band and the next higher
unoccupied band (conduction band) is large, electrons cannot jump to
it and such a substance has very small conductivity and it behaves as
an insulator (Fig. 1.29 b).
1.10.2 Conduction
of
Electricity
in Semi-
conductors In case of semiconductors, the gap between the valence band and
conduction band is small (Fig. 1.29c). Therefore, some electrons may
jump to conduction band and show some conductivity. Electrical
conductivity of semiconductors increases with rise in temperature, since
more electrons can jump to the conduction band. Substances like
silicon and germanium show this type of behaviour and are called
intrinsic semiconductors.
The conductivity of these intrinsic semiconductors is too low to
be of practical use. Their conductivity is increased by adding an
appropriate amount of suitable impurity. This process is called
Fig. 1.29
Distinction among
(a) metals
(b) insulators and
(c) semiconductors.
In each case, an
unshaded area
represents a
conduction band.
25
The Solid Statedoping. Doping can be done with an impurity which is electron rich
or electron deficient as compared to the intrinsic semiconductor
silicon or germanium. Such impurities introduce electronic defects
in them.
(a) Electron – rich impurities
Silicon and germanium belong to group 14 of the periodic table and
have four valence electrons each. In their crystals each atom forms
four covalent bonds with its neighbours (Fig. 1.30 a). When doped
with a group 15 element like P or As, which contains five valence
electrons, they occupy some of the lattice sites in silicon or
germanium crystal (Fig. 1.30 b). Four out of five electrons are used
in the formation of four covalent bonds with the four neighbouring
silicon atoms. The fifth electron is extra and becomes delocalised.
These delocalised electrons increase the conductivity of doped silicon
(or germanium). Here the increase in conductivity is due to the
negatively charged electron, hence silicon doped with electron-rich
impurity is called n-type semiconductor.
(b) Electron – deficit impurities
Silicon or germanium can also be doped with a group 13 element
like B, Al or Ga which contains only three valence electrons. The
place where the fourth valence electron is missing is called electron
hole or electron vacancy (Fig. 1.30 c). An electron from a
neighbouring atom can come and fill the electron hole, but in doing
so it would leave an electron hole at its original position. If it
happens, it would appear as if the electron hole has moved in the
direction opposite to that of the electron that filled it. Under the
influence of electric field, electrons would move towards the positively
charged plate through electronic holes, but it would appear as if
electron holes are positively charged and are moving towards
negatively charged plate. This type of semi conductors are called
p-type semiconductors.
Fig. 1.30: Creation of n-type and p-type semiconductors
by doping groups 13 and 15 elements.
Chemistry
26Applications of n-type and p-type semiconductors
1.11 Magnetic
Properties
Various combinations of n-type and p-type semiconductors are used
for making electronic components. Diode is a combination of n-type
and p-type semiconductors and is used as a rectifier. Transistors are
made by sandwiching a layer of one type of semiconductor between
two layers of the other type of semiconductor. npn and pnp type of
transistors are used to detect or amplify radio or audio signals. The
solar cell is an efficient photo-diode used for conversion of light energy
into electrical energy.
Germanium and silicon are group 14 elements and therefore, have
a characteristic valence of four and form four bonds as in diamond. A
large variety of solid state materials have been prepared by combination
of groups 13 and 15 or 12 and 16 to simulate average valence of four
as in Ge or Si. Typical compounds of groups 13 – 15 are InSb, AlP
and GaAs. Gallium arsenide (GaAs) semiconductors have very fast
response and have revolutionised the design of semiconductor devices.
ZnS, CdS, CdSe and HgTe are examples of groups 12 – 16 compounds.
In these compounds, the bonds are not perfectly covalent and the ionic
character depends on the electronegativities of the two elements.
It is interesting to learn that transition metal oxides show marked
differences in electrical properties. TiO, CrO 2 and ReO 3 behave like
metals. Rhenium oxide, ReO 3 is like metallic copper in its conductivity
and appearance. Certain other oxides like VO, VO 2 , VO 3 and TiO 3
show metallic or insulating properties depending on temperature.
Every substance has some magnetic properties associated with it.
The origin of these properties lies in the electrons. Each electron in an
atom behaves like a tiny magnet. Its magnetic moment originates
from two types of motions (i) its orbital
motion around the nucleus and (ii) its spin
around its own axis (Fig. 1.31). Electron
being a charged particle and undergoing
these motions can be considered as a small
loop of current which possesses a magnetic
moment. Thus, each electron has a
permanent spin and an orbital magnetic
moment associated with it. Magnitude of
Fig.1.31: Demonstration of the magnetic moment
this magnetic moment is very small and
associated with (a) an orbiting electron
is measured in the unit called Bohr
–24
2
and (b) a spinning electron.
magneton, μ B . It is equal to 9.27 × 10 A m .
On the basis of their magnetic properties, substances can be
classified into five categories: (i) paramagnetic (ii) diamagnetic (iii)
ferromagnetic (iv) antiferromagnetic and (v) ferrimagnetic.
(i) Paramagnetism: Paramagnetic substances are weakly attracted
by a magnetic field. They are magnetised in a magnetic field in
the same direction. They lose their magnetism in the absence of
magnetic field. Paramagnetism is due to presence of one or
more unpaired electrons which are attracted by the magnetic
field. O 2 , Cu 2+ , Fe 3+ , Cr 3+ are some examples of such substances.
27
The Solid State(ii) Diamagnetism: Diamagnetic substances are weakly repelled by
a magnetic field. H 2 O, NaCl and C 6 H 6 are some examples of such
substances. They are weakly magnetised in a magnetic field in
opposite direction. Diamagnetism is shown by those substances
in which all the electrons are paired and there are no unpaired
electrons. Pairing of electrons cancels their magnetic moments
and they lose their magnetic character.
(iii) Ferromagnetism: A few substances like iron, cobalt, nickel,
gadolinium and CrO 2 are attracted very strongly by a magnetic
field. Such substances are called ferromagnetic substances.
Besides strong attractions, these substances can be permanently
magnetised. In solid state, the metal ions of ferromagnetic
substances are grouped together into small regions called
domains. Thus, each domain acts as a tiny magnet. In an
unmagnetised piece of a ferromagnetic substance the domains
are randomly oriented and their magnetic moments get cancelled.
When the substance is placed in a magnetic field all the domains
get oriented in the direction of the magnetic field (Fig. 1.32 a)
and a strong magnetic effect is produced. This ordering of
domains persist even when the magnetic field is removed and
the ferromagnetic substance becomes a permanent magnet.
(iv) Antiferromagnetism: Substances like MnO showing anti-
ferromagnetism have domain structure similar to ferromagnetic
substance, but their domains are oppositely oriented and cancel
out each other's magnetic moment (Fig. 1.32 b).
(v) Ferrimagnetism: Ferrimagnetism is observed when the magnetic
moments of the domains in the substance are aligned in parallel
and anti-parallel directions in unequal numbers (Fig. 1.32 c). They
are weakly attracted by magnetic field as compared to ferromagnetic
substances. Fe 3 O 4 (magnetite) and ferrites like MgFe 2 O 4 and
ZnFe 2 O 4 are examples of such substances. These substances also
lose ferrimagnetism on heating and become paramagnetic.
Fig 1.32: Schematic alignment of magnetic moments in (a) ferromagnetic
(b) antiferromagnetic and (c) ferrimagnetic.
Chemistry
28Intext Questions
1.19 What type of defect can arise when a solid is heated? Which physical
property is affected by it and in what way?
1.20 What type of stoichiometric defect is shown by:
(i) ZnS
(ii) AgBr
Explain how vacancies are introduced in an ionic solid when a cation
of higher valence is added as an impurity in it.
Ionic solids, which have anionic vacancies due to metal excess defect,
develop colour. Explain with the help of a suitable example.
A group 14 element is to be converted into n-type semiconductor by doping
it with a suitable impurity. To which group should this impurity belong?
What type of substances would make better permanent magnets,
ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic. Justify your answer.
1.21
1.22
1.23
1.24
Summary
Solids have definite mass, volume and shape. This is due to the fixed position of
their constituent particles, short distances and strong interactions between them.
In amorphous solids, the arrangement of constituent particles has only short
range order and consequently they behave like super cooled liquids, do not have
sharp melting points and are isotropic in nature. In crystalline solids there is long
range order in the arrangement of their constituent particles. They have sharp
melting points, are anisotropic in nature and their particles have characteristic
shapes. Properties of crystalline solids depend upon the nature of interactions
between their constituent particles. On this basis, they can be divided into four
categories, namely: molecular, ionic, metallic and covalent solids. They differ
widely in their properties.
The constituent particles in crystalline solids are arranged in a regular pattern
which extends throughout the crystal. This arrangement is often depicted in the
form of a three dimensional array of points which is called crystal lattice. Each
lattice point gives the location of one particle in space. In all, fourteen different
types of lattices are possible which are called Bravais lattices. Each lattice can be
generated by repeating its small characteristic portion called unit cell. A unit cell
is characterised by its edge lengths and three angles between these edges. Unit
cells can be either primitive which have particles only at their corner positions or
centred. The centred unit cells have additional particles at their body centre (body-
centred), at the centre of each face (face-centred) or at the centre of two opposite
faces (end-centred). There are seven types of primitive unit cells. Taking centred
unit cells also into account, there are fourteen types of unit cells in all, which
result in fourteen Bravais lattices.
Close-packing of particles result in two highly efficient lattices, hexagonal
close-packed (hcp) and cubic close-packed (ccp). The latter is also called face-
centred cubic (fcc) lattice. In both of these packings 74% space is filled. The
remaining space is present in the form of two types of voids-octahedral voids and
tetrahedral voids. Other types of packing are not close-packings and have less
29
The Solid Stateefficient packing of particles. While in body-centred cubic lattice (bcc) 68% space
is filled, in simple cubic lattice only 52.4 % space is filled.
Solids are not perfect in structure. There are different types of imperfections
or defects in them. Point defects and line defects are common types of defects.
Point defects are of three types - stoichiometric defects, impurity defects and
non-stoichiometric defects. Vacancy defects and interstitial defects are the
two basic types of stoichiometric point defects. In ionic solids, these defects are
present as Frenkel and Schottky defects. Impurity defects are caused by the
presence of an impurity in the crystal. In ionic solids, when the ionic impurity has
a different valence than the main compound, some vacancies are created. Non-
stoichiometric defects are of metal excess type and metal deficient type.
Sometimes calculated amounts of impurities are introduced by doping in
semiconductors that change their electrical properties. Such materials are widely
used in electronics industry. Solids show many types of magnetic properties like
paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, antiferromagnetism and
ferrimagnetism. These properties are used in audio, video and other recording
devices. All these properties can be correlated with their electronic configurations
or structures.
Exercises
1.1 Define the term 'amorphous'. Give a few examples of amorphous solids.
1.2 What makes a glass different from a solid such as quartz? Under what
conditions could quartz be converted into glass?
1.3 Classify each of the following solids as ionic, metallic, molecular, network
(covalent) or amorphous.
(i) Tetra phosphorus decoxide (P 4 O 10 )
(vii) Graphite
(ii) Ammonium phosphate (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4
(viii) Brass
(iii) SiC
(ix) Rb
(iv) I 2
(x) LiBr
(v) P 4
(xi) Si
(vi) Plastic
1.4
Chemistry
(i) What is
(ii) What is
(a) in a
(b) in a
meant by the term 'coordination number'?
the coordination number of atoms:
cubic close-packed structure?
body-centred cubic structure?
1.5 How can you determine the atomic mass of an unknown metal if you know
its density and the dimension of its unit cell? Explain.
1.6 'Stability of a crystal is reflected in the magnitude of its melting points'.
Comment. Collect melting points of solid water, ethyl alcohol, diethyl ether
and methane from a data book. What can you say about the intermolecular
forces between these molecules?
301.7 How will you distinguish between the following pairs of terms:
(i) Hexagonal close-packing and cubic close-packing?
(ii) Crystal lattice and unit cell ?
(iii) Tetrahedral void and octahedral void ?
1.8 How many lattice points are there in one unit cell of each of the following
lattice?
(i) Face-centred cubic
(ii) Face-centred tetragonal
(iii) Body-centred
1.9 Explain
(i) The basis of similarities and differences between metallic and ionic
crystals.
(ii) Ionic solids are hard and brittle.
1.10
Calculate the efficiency of packing in case of a metal crystal for
(i) simple cubic
(ii) body-centred cubic
(iii) face-centred cubic (with the assumptions that atoms are touching
each other).
1.11 Silver crystallises in fcc lattice. If edge length of the cell is 4.07 × 10 –8
cm and density is 10.5 g cm –3 , calculate the atomic mass of silver.
1.12 A cubic solid is made of two elements P and Q. Atoms of Q are at the
corners of the cube and P at the body-centre. What is the formula of the
compound? What are the coordination numbers of P and Q?
1.13 Niobium crystallises in body-centred cubic structure. If density is 8.55
g cm –3 , calculate atomic radius of niobium using its atomic mass 93 u.
1.14 If the radius of the octahedral void is r and radius of the atoms in close-
packing is R, derive relation between r and R.
1.15 Copper crystallises into a fcc lattice with edge length 3.61 × 10 –8 cm.
Show that the calculated density is in agreement with its measured
value of 8.92 g cm –3 .
1.16 Analysis shows that nickel oxide has the formula Ni 0.98 O 1.00 . What fractions
of nickel exist as Ni 2+ and Ni 3+ ions?
1.17 What is a semiconductor? Describe the two main types of semiconductors
and contrast their conduction mechanism.
1.18 Non-stoichiometric cuprous oxide, Cu 2 O can be prepared in laboratory.
In this oxide, copper to oxygen ratio is slightly less than 2:1. Can you
account for the fact that this substance is a p-type semiconductor?
1.19 Ferric oxide crystallises in a hexagonal close-packed array of oxide ions
with two out of every three octahedral holes occupied by ferric ions.
Derive the formula of the ferric oxide.
1.20 Classify each of the following as being either a p-type or a n-type
semiconductor:
(i) Ge doped with In
(ii) Si doped with B.
31
The Solid State1.21 Gold (atomic radius = 0.144 nm) crystallises in a face-centred unit cell.
What is the length of a side of the cell?
1.22 In terms of band theory, what is the difference
(i) between a conductor and an insulator
(ii) between a conductor and a semiconductor?
1.23
Explain the following terms with suitable examples:
(i) Schottky defect
1.24
(ii) Frenkel defect (iii) Interstitials and
(iv) F-centres.
Aluminium crystallises in a cubic close-packed structure. Its metallic
radius is 125 pm.
(i) What is the length of the side of the unit cell?
(ii) How many unit cells are there in 1.00 cm 3 of aluminium?
1.25 If NaCl is doped with 10 –3 mol % of SrCl 2 , what is the concentration of
cation vacancies?
1.26 Explain the following with suitable examples:
(i) Ferromagnetism
(ii) Paramagnetism
(iii) Ferrimagnetism
(iv) Antiferromagnetism
(v) 12-16 and 13-15 group compounds.
Answers to Some Intext Questions
1.14 4
1.15 Total number of voids = 9.033 × 10 23
Number of tetrahedral voids = 6.022 × 10 23
1.16 M 2 N 3
1.18 ccp
Chemistry
32
Unit
2
Objectives
Solutions
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• describe the formation of different
types of solutions;
• express concentration of solution
in different units;
• state and explain Henry’s law and
Raoult’s law;
• distinguish between ideal and
non-ideal solutions;
• explain deviations of real solutions
from Raoult’s law;
• describe colligative properties of
solutions and correlate these with
molar masses of the solutes;
• explain abnormal colligative
properties exhibited by some
solutes in solutions.
2.1 Types of
Solutions
Almost all processes in body occur in some kind of liquid solutions.
In normal life we rarely come across pure substances.
Most of these are mixtures containing two or more pure
substances. Their utility or importance in life depends
on their composition. For example, the properties of
brass (mixture of copper and zinc) are quite different
from those of German silver (mixture of copper, zinc
and nickel) or bronze (mixture of copper and tin);
1 part per million (ppm) of fluoride ions in water
prevents tooth decay, while 1.5 ppm causes the tooth
to become mottled and high concentrations of fluoride
ions can be poisonous (for example, sodium fluoride is
used in rat poison); intravenous injections are always
dissolved in water containing salts at particular ionic
concentrations that match with blood plasma
concentrations and so on.
In this Unit, we will consider mostly liquid
solutions and their formation. This will be followed by
studying the properties of the solutions, like vapour
pressure and colligative properties. We will begin with
types of solutions and then various alternatives in
which concentrations of a solute can be expressed in
liquid solution.
Solutions are homogeneous mixtures of two or more than two
components. By homogenous mixture we mean that its composition
and properties are uniform throughout the mixture. Generally, the
component that is present in the largest quantity is known as solvent.
Solvent determines the physical state in which solution exists. One or
more components present in the solution other than solvent are called
solutes. In this Unit we shall consider only binary solutions (i.e.,
2017-18consisting of two components). Here each component may be solid,
liquid or in gaseous state and are summarised in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Types of Solutions
Type of Solution Solute Solvent Gaseous Solutions Gas Gas Mixture of oxygen and nitrogen gases
Liquid Gas Chloroform mixed with nitrogen gas
Solid Gas Camphor in nitrogen gas
Gas Liquid Oxygen dissolved in water
Liquid Liquid Ethanol dissolved in water
Solid Liquid Glucose dissolved in water
Gas Solid Solution of hydrogen in palladium
Liquid Solid Amalgam of mercury with sodium
Solid Solid Copper dissolved in gold
Liquid Solutions
Solid Solutions
2.2 Expressing
Concentration
of Solutions
Common Examples
Composition of a solution can be described by expressing its
concentration. The latter can be expressed either qualitatively or
quantitatively. For example, qualitatively we can say that the solution
is dilute (i.e., relatively very small quantity of solute) or it is concentrated
(i.e., relatively very large quantity of solute). But in real life these kinds
of description can add to lot of confusion and thus the need for a
quantitative description of the solution.
There are several ways by which we can describe the concentration
of the solution quantitatively.
(i) Mass percentage (w/w): The mass percentage of a component of
a solution is defined as:
Mass % of a component
=
Mass of the component in the solution
× 100
Total mass of the solution
(2.1)
For example, if a solution is described by 10% glucose in water
by mass, it means that 10 g of glucose is dissolved in 90 g of
water resulting in a 100 g solution. Concentration described by
mass percentage is commonly used in industrial chemical
applications. For example, commercial bleaching solution contains
3.62 mass percentage of sodium hypochlorite in water.
(ii) Volume percentage (V/V): The volume percentage is defined as:
Volume of the component
× 100
Volume % of a component =
Total volume of solution
(2.2)
Chemistry
34
2017-18For example, 10% ethanol solution in water means that 10 mL of
ethanol is dissolved in water such that the total volume of the
solution is 100 mL. Solutions coxntaining liquids are commonly
expressed in this unit. For example, a 35% (v/v) solution of
ethylene glycol, an antifreeze, is used in cars for cooling the engine.
At this concentration the antifreeze lowers the freezing point of
water to 255.4K (–17.6°C).
(iii) Mass by volume percentage (w/V): Another unit which is
commonly used in medicine and pharmacy is mass by volume
percentage. It is the mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL of the
solution.
(iv) Parts per million: When a solute is present in trace quantities, it
is convenient to express concentration in parts per million (ppm)
and is defined as:
Parts per million =
=
Number of parts of the component
×10 6 (2.3)
Total number of parts of all components of the solution
As in the case of percentage, concentration in parts per million
can also be expressed as mass to mass, volume to volume and
mass to volume. A litre of sea water (which weighs 1030 g) contains
about 6 × 10 –3 g of dissolved oxygen (O 2 ). Such a small
6
concentration is also expressed as 5.8 g per 10 g (5.8 ppm) of sea
water. The concentration of pollutants in water or atmosphere is
–1
often expressed in terms of μg mL or ppm.
(v) Mole fraction: Commonly used symbol for mole fraction is x and
subscript used on the right hand side of x denotes the component.
It is defined as:
Mole fraction of a component =
Number of moles of the component
Total number of moles of all the compone nts
(2.4)
For example, in a binary mixture, if the number of moles of A and
B are n A and n B respectively, the mole fraction of A will be
x A =
n A
n A + n B
(2.5)
For a solution containing i number of components, we have:
x i =
n i
=
n 1 + n 2 + ....... + n i
n i
∑ n i
(2.6)
It can be shown that in a given solution sum of all the mole
fractions is unity, i.e.
x 1 + x 2 + .................. + x i = 1
(2.7)
Mole fraction unit is very useful in relating some physical properties
of solutions, say vapour pressure with the concentration of the
solution and quite useful in describing the calculations involving
gas mixtures.
35
Solutions
2017-18Example 2.1 Calculate the mole fraction of ethylene glycol (C 2 H 6 O 2 ) in a solution
containing 20% of C 2 H 6 O 2 by mass.
Solution Assume that we have 100 g of solution (one can start with any amount of
solution because the results obtained will be the same). Solution will
contain 20 g of ethylene glycol and 80 g of water.
Molar mass of C 2 H 6 O 2 = 12 × 2 + 1 × 6 + 16 × 2 = 62 g mol –1 .
Moles of C 2 H 6 O 2 =
Moles of water =
x glycol =
=
20 g
= 0.322 mol
62 g mol −1
80 g
= 4.444 mol
18 g mol -1
moles of C 2 H 6 O 2
moles of C 2 H 6 O 2 + moles of H 2 O
0.322 mol
= 0.068
0.322 mol + 4.444 mol
Similarly, x water =
4.444 mol
= 0.932
0.322 mol + 4.444 mol
Mole fraction of water can also be calculated as: 1 – 0.068 = 0.932
(vi) Molarity: Molarity (M) is defined as number of moles of solute
dissolved in one litre (or one cubic decimetre) of solution,
Molarity =
Moles of solute
Volume of solution in litre
(2.8)
For example, 0.25 mol L –1 (or 0.25 M) solution of NaOH means that
0.25 mol of NaOH has been dissolved in one litre (or one cubic decimetre).
Example 2.2 Calculate the molarity of a solution containing 5 g of NaOH in 450 mL
solution.
Solution Moles of NaOH =
5 g
= 0.125 mol
40 g mol -1
Volume of the solution in litres = 450 mL / 1000 mL L -1
Using equation (2.8),
Molarity =
0.125 mol × 1000 mL L –1
= 0.278 M
450 mL
= 0.278 mol L –1
= 0.278 mol dm –3
Chemistry
36
2017-18(vii) Molality: Molality (m) is defined as the number of moles of the
solute per kilogram (kg) of the solvent and is expressed as:
Molality (m) =
Moles of solute
Mass of solvent in kg
(2.9)
–1
For example, 1.00 mol kg (or 1.00 m) solution of KCl means that
1 mol (74.5 g) of KCl is dissolved in 1 kg of water.
Each method of expressing concentration of the solutions has its
own merits and demerits. Mass %, ppm, mole fraction and molality
are independent of temperature, whereas molarity is a function of
temperature. This is because volume depends on temperature
and the mass does not.
Calculate molality of 2.5 g of ethanoic acid (CH 3 COOH) in 75 g of benzene. Example 2.3
Molar mass of C 2 H 4 O 2 : 12 × 2 + 1 × 4 + 16 × 2 = 60 g mol –1 Solution
Moles of C 2 H 4 O 2 =
2.5 g
= 0.0417 mol
60 g mol − 1
Mass of benzene in kg = 75 g/1000 g kg –1 = 75 × 10 –3 kg
Molality of C 2 H 4 O 2 =
Moles of C 2 H 4 O 2
0.0417 mol × 1000 g kg − 1
=
kg of benzene
75 g
= 0.556 mol kg –1
Intext Questions
2.1 Calculate the mass percentage of benzene (C 6 H 6 ) and carbon tetrachloride
(CCl 4 ) if 22 g of benzene is dissolved in 122 g of carbon tetrachloride.
2.2 Calculate the mole fraction of benzene in solution containing 30% by
mass in carbon tetrachloride.
2.3 Calculate the molarity of each of the following solutions: (a) 30 g of
Co(NO 3 ) 2 . 6H 2 O in 4.3 L of solution (b) 30 mL of 0.5 M H 2 SO 4 diluted to
500 mL.
2.4 Calculate the mass of urea (NH 2 CONH 2 ) required in making 2.5 kg of
0.25 molal aqueous solution.
2.5 Calculate (a) molality (b) molarity and (c) mole fraction of KI if the density
of 20% (mass/mass) aqueous KI is 1.202 g mL -1 .
2.3 Solubility
Solubility of a substance is its maximum amount that can be dissolved
in a specified amount of solvent at a specified temperature. It depends
upon the nature of solute and solvent as well as temperature and
pressure. Let us consider the effect of these factors in solution of a solid
or a gas in a liquid.
37
Solutions
2017-182.3.1 Solubility of
a Solid in a
Liquid
Every solid does not dissolve in a given liquid. While sodium chloride
and sugar dissolve readily in water, naphthalene and anthracene do
not. On the other hand, naphthalene and anthracene dissolve readily in
benzene but sodium chloride and sugar do not. It is observed that
polar solutes dissolve in polar solvents and non polar solutes in non-
polar solvents. In general, a solute dissolves in a solvent if the
intermolecular interactions are similar in the two or we may say like
dissolves like.
When a solid solute is added to the solvent, some solute dissolves
and its concentration increases in solution. This process is known as
dissolution. Some solute particles in solution collide with the solid solute
particles and get separated out of solution. This process is known as
crystallisation. A stage is reached when the two processes occur at the
same rate. Under such conditions, number of solute particles going
into solution will be equal to the solute particles separating out and
a state of dynamic equilibrium is reached.
Solute + Solvent  Solution
(2.10)
At this stage the concentration of solute in solution will remain
constant under the given conditions, i.e., temperature and pressure.
Similar process is followed when gases are dissolved in liquid solvents.
Such a solution in which no more solute can be dissolved at the same
temperature and pressure is called a saturated solution. An
unsaturated solution is one in which more solute can be dissolved at
the same temperature. The solution which is in dynamic equilibrium
with undissolved solute is the saturated solution and contains the
maximum amount of solute dissolved in a given amount of solvent.
Thus, the concentration of solute in such a solution is its solubility.
Earlier we have observed that solubility of one substance into
another depends on the nature of the substances. In addition to these
variables, two other parameters, i.e., temperature and pressure also
control this phenomenon.
Effect of temperature
The solubility of a solid in a liquid is significantly affected by temperature
changes. Consider the equilibrium represented by equation 2.10. This,
being dynamic equilibrium, must follow Le Chateliers Principle. In
general, if in a nearly saturated solution, the dissolution process is
endothermic (∆ sol H > 0), the solubility should increase with rise in
temperature and if it is exothermic (∆ sol H < 0) the solubility should
decrease. These trends are also observed experimentally.
Effect of pressure
Pressure does not have any significant effect on solubility of solids in
liquids. It is so because solids and liquids are highly incompressible
and practically remain unaffected by changes in pressure.
2.3.2 Solubility of
a Gas in a
Liquid
Chemistry
Many gases dissolve in water. Oxygen dissolves only to a small extent
in water. It is this dissolved oxygen which sustains all aquatic life. On
the other hand, hydrogen chloride gas (HCl) is highly soluble in water.
Solubility of gases in liquids is greatly affected by pressure and
38
2017-18temperature. The solubility of gases increase with increase of pressure.
For solution of gases in a solvent, consider a system as shown in
Fig. 2.1 (a). The lower part is solution and the upper part is gaseous
system at pressure p and temperature T. Assume this system to be in
a state of dynamic equilibrium, i.e., under these conditions rate of
gaseous particles entering and leaving the solution phase is the same.
Now increase the pressure over the solution phase by compressing the
gas to a smaller volume [Fig. 2.1 (b)]. This will increase the number of
gaseous particles per unit volume over the solution and also the rate
at which the gaseous particles are striking the surface of solution to
enter it. The solubility of the gas will increase until a new equilibrium
is reached resulting in an increase in the pressure of a gas above the
solution and thus its solubility increases.
Henry was the first to give a
quantitative relation between
pressure and solubility of a gas
in a solvent which is known as
Henry’s law. The law states that
at a constant temperature, the
solubility of a gas in a liquid
is directly proportional to the
partial pressure of the gas
present above the surface of
liquid or solution. Dalton, a
contemporary of Henry, also
Fig. 2.1: Effect of pressure on the solubility of a gas. The concluded independently that the
concentration of dissolved gas is proportional to the solubility of a gas in a liquid
pressure on the gas above the solution.
solution is a function of partial
pressure of the gas. If we use the mole fraction of a gas
in the solution as a measure of its solubility, then it can
be said that the mole fraction of gas in the solution
is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas
over the solution. The most commonly used form of
Henry’s law states that “the partial pressure of the gas
in vapour phase (p) is proportional to the mole fraction
of the gas (x) in the solution” and is expressed as:
Fig. 2.2: Experimental results for the
solubility of HCl gas in
cyclohexane at 293 K. The
slope of the line is the
Henry’s Law constant, K H .
p = K H x
(2.11)
Here K H is the Henry’s law constant. If we draw a
graph between partial pressure of the gas versus mole
fraction of the gas in solution, then we should get a plot
of the type as shown in Fig. 2.2.
Different gases have different K H values at the same
temperature (Table 2.2). This suggests that K H is a
function of the nature of the gas.
It is obvious from equation (2.11) that higher the
value of K H at a given pressure, the lower is the solubility
of the gas in the liquid. It can be seen from Table 2.2
that K H values for both N 2 and O 2 increase with increase
of temperature indicating that the solubility of gases
39
Solutions
2017-18Table 2.2: Values of Henry's Law Constant for Some Selected Gases in Water
Gas Temperature/K K H /kbar Gas Temperature/K
K H /kbar
He 293 144.97 Argon 298 40.3
H 2 293 69.16 1.67
293 76.48 CO 2 298 N 2 N 2 303 88.84 Formaldehyde 298 1.83×10 -5
O 2 293 34.86 Methane 298 0.413
O 2 303 46.82 Vinyl chloride 298 0.611
increases with decrease of temperature. It is due to this reason that
aquatic species are more comfortable in cold waters rather than in
warm waters.
Example 2.4 If N 2 gas is bubbled through water at 293 K, how many millimoles of N 2
gas would dissolve in 1 litre of water? Assume that N 2 exerts a partial
pressure of 0.987 bar. Given that Henry’s law constant for N 2 at 293 K is
76.48 kbar.
Solution The solubility of gas is related to the mole fraction in aqueous solution.
The mole fraction of the gas in the solution is calculated by applying
Henry’s law. Thus:
p (nitrogen)
0.987bar
=
= 1.29 × 10 –5
K H
76,480 bar
As 1 litre of water contains 55.5 mol of it, therefore if n represents
number of moles of N 2 in solution,
x (Nitrogen) =
n mol
n
=
= 1.29 × 10 –5
n mol + 55.5 mol
55.5
(n in denominator is neglected as it is < < 55.5)
Thus n = 1.29 × 10 –5 × 55.5 mol = 7.16 × 10 –4 mol
x (Nitrogen) =
=
7.16×10 −4 mol × 1000 mmol
= 0.716 mmol
1 mol
Henry’s law finds several applications in industry and explains some
biological phenomena. Notable among these are:
• To increase the solubility of CO 2 in soft drinks and soda water, the
bottle is sealed under high pressure.
• Scuba divers must cope with high concentrations of dissolved gases
while breathing air at high pressure underwater. Increased pressure
increases the solubility of atmospheric gases in blood. When the
divers come towards surface, the pressure gradually decreases. This
releases the dissolved gases and leads to the formation of bubbles
of nitrogen in the blood. This blocks capillaries and creates a medical
condition known as bends, which are painful and dangerous to life.
Chemistry
40
2017-18To avoid bends, as well as, the toxic effects of high concentrations
of nitrogen in the blood, the tanks used by scuba divers are filled
with air diluted with helium (11.7% helium, 56.2% nitrogen and
32.1% oxygen).
• At high altitudes the partial pressure of oxygen is less than that at
the ground level. This leads to low concentrations of oxygen in the
blood and tissues of people living at high altitudes or climbers. Low
blood oxygen causes climbers to become weak and unable to think
clearly, symptoms of a condition known as anoxia.
Effect of Temperature
Solubility of gases in liquids decreases with rise in temperature. When
dissolved, the gas molecules are present in liquid phase and the process
of dissolution can be considered similar to condensation and heat
is evolved in this process. We have learnt in the last Section that
dissolution process involves dynamic equilibrium and thus must follow
Le Chatelier’s Principle. As dissolution is an exothermic process, the
solubility should decrease with increase of temperature.
Intext Questions
2.6 H 2 S, a toxic gas with rotten egg like smell, is used for the qualitative analysis. If
the solubility of H 2 S in water at STP is 0.195 m, calculate Henry’s law constant.
2.7 Henry’s law constant for CO 2 in water is 1.67x10 8 Pa at 298 K. Calculate
the quantity of CO 2 in 500 mL of soda water when packed under 2.5 atm
CO 2 pressure at 298 K.
2.4 Vapour
Pressure of
Liquid
Solutions Liquid solutions are formed when solvent is a liquid. The solute can be
a gas, a liquid or a solid. Solutions of gases in liquids have already
been discussed in Section 2.3.2. In this Section, we shall discuss the
solutions of liquids and solids in a liquid. Such solutions may contain
one or more volatile components. Generally, the liquid solvent is volatile.
The solute may or may not be volatile. We shall discuss the properties
of only binary solutions, that is, the solutions containing two
components, namely, the solutions of (i) liquids in liquids and (ii) solids
in liquids.
2.4.1 Vapour
Pressure of
Liquid-
Liquid
Solutions Let us consider a binary solution of two volatile liquids and denote the
two components as 1 and 2. When taken in a closed vessel, both the
components would evaporate and eventually an equilibrium would be
established between vapour phase and the liquid phase. Let the total
vapour pressure at this stage be p total and p 1 and p 2 be the partial
vapour pressures of the two components 1 and 2 respectively. These
partial pressures are related to the mole fractions x 1 and x 2 of the two
components 1 and 2 respectively.
The French chemist, Francois Marte Raoult (1886) gave the
quantitative relationship between them. The relationship is known as
the Raoult’s law which states that for a solution of volatile liquids,
41
Solutions
2017-18the partial vapour pressure of each component of the solution
is directly proportional to its mole fraction present in solution.
Thus, for component 1
p 1 ∝ x 1
p 1 = p 1 0 x 1
and
(2.12)
0
1
where p is the vapour pressure of pure component 1 at the same
temperature.
Similarly, for component 2
p 2 = p 20 x 2
(2.13)
0
where p 2 represents the vapour pressure of the pure component 2.
According to Dalton’s law of partial pressures, the total pressure
( p total ) over the solution phase in the container will be the sum of the
partial pressures of the components of the solution and is given as:
p total = p 1 + p 2
(2.14)
Substituting the values of p 1 and p 2 , we get
p total = x 1 p 10 + x 2 p 20
= (1 – x 2 ) p 10 + x 2 p 20 (2.15)
= p 10 + (p 20 – p 10 ) x 2 (2.16)
Following conclusions can be drawn from equation (2.16).
(i) Total vapour pressure over the solution can be related to the mole
fraction of any one component.
(ii) Total vapour pressure over the solution varies linearly with the
mole fraction of component 2.
(iii) Depending on the vapour pressures
of the pure components 1 and 2,
total vapour pressure over the
solution decreases or increases with
the increase of the mole fraction of
component 1.
Fig. 2.3: The plot of vapour pressure and mole fraction
of an ideal solution at constant temperature.
The dashed lines I and II represent the partial
pressure of the components. (It can be seen
from the plot that p 1 and p 2 are directly
proportional to x 1 and x 2 , respectively). The
total vapour pressure is given by line marked
III in the figure.
Chemistry
A plot of p 1 or p 2 versus the mole
fractions x 1 and x 2 for a solution gives a
linear plot as shown in Fig. 2.3. These
lines (I and II) pass through the points
for which x 1 and x 2 are equal to unity.
Similarly the plot (line III) of p total versus
x 2 is also linear (Fig. 2.3). The minimum
0
value of p total is p 1 and the maximum value
0
is p 2 , assuming that component 1 is less
0
0
volatile than component 2, i.e., p 1 < p 2 .
The composition of vapour phase in
equilibrium with the solution is determined
by the partial pressures of the components.
If y 1 and y 2 are the mole fractions of the
42
2017-18components 1 and 2 respectively in the vapour phase then, using Dalton’s
law of partial pressures:
p 1 = y 1 p total
p 2 = y 2 p total (2.17)
(2.18)
In general
p i = y i p total (2.19)
Vapour pressure of chloroform (CHCl 3 ) and dichloromethane (CH 2 Cl 2 )
at 298 K are 200 mm Hg and 415 mm Hg respectively. (i) Calculate
the vapour pressure of the solution prepared by mixing 25.5 g of
CHCl 3 and 40 g of CH 2 Cl 2 at 298 K and, (ii) mole fractions of each
component in vapour phase.
(i) Molar mass of CH 2 Cl 2 = 12 × 1 + 1 × 2 + 35.5 × 2 = 85 g mol –1
Molar mass of CHCl 3 = 12 × 1 + 1 × 1 + 35.5 × 3 = 119.5 g mol -1
Moles of CH 2 Cl 2
Moles of CHCl 3
Example 2.5
Solution
40 g
= 85 g mol − 1 = 0.47 mol
25.5 g
= 119.5 g mol − 1 = 0.213 mol
Total number of moles = 0.47 + 0.213 = 0.683 mol
x CH 2 Cl 2 =
0.47 mol
0.683 mol
= 0.688
x CHCl 3 = 1.00 – 0.688 = 0.312
Using equation (2.16),
p total
= p 10 + (p 20 – p 10 ) x 2 = 200 + (415 – 200) × 0.688
= 200 + 147.9 = 347.9 mm Hg
(ii) Using the relation (2.19), y i = p i /p total , we can calculate the mole
fraction of the components in gas phase (y i ).
p CH 2 Cl 2 = 0.688 × 415 mm Hg = 285.5 mm Hg
p CHCl 3 = 0.312 × 200 mm Hg = 62.4 mm Hg
y CH 2 Cl 2 = 285.5 mm Hg/347.9 mm Hg = 0.82
y CHCl 3 = 62.4 mm Hg/347.9 mm Hg = 0.18
0
Note: Since, CH 2 Cl 2 is a more volatile component than CHCl 3 , [ p CH 2 Cl 2 =
0
415 mm Hg and p CHCl 3 = 200 mm Hg] and the vapour phase is also richer
in CH 2 Cl 2 [ y CH 2 Cl 2 = 0.82 and y CHCl 3 = 0.18], it may thus be concluded
that at equilibrium, vapour phase will be always rich in the component
which is more volatile.
43
Solutions
2017-182.4.2 Raoult’s
Law as a
special case
of Henry’s
Law
According to Raoult’s law, the vapour pressure of a volatile component
in a given solution is given by p i = x i p i0 . In the solution of a gas in a
liquid, one of the components is so volatile that it exists as a gas and
we have already seen that its solubility is given by Henry’s law which
states that
p = K H x.
If we compare the equations for Raoult’s law and Henry’s law, it
can be seen that the partial pressure of the volatile component or gas
is directly proportional to its mole fraction in solution. Only the
0
proportionality constant K H differs from p 1 . Thus, Raoult’s law becomes
0
a special case of Henry’s law in which K H becomes equal to p 1 .
2.4.3 Vapour
Pressure of
Solutions of
Solids in
Liquids
Another important class of solutions consists of solids dissolved in
liquid, for example, sodium chloride, glucose, urea and cane sugar in
water and iodine and sulphur dissolved in carbon disulphide. Some
physical properties of these solutions are quite different from those of
pure solvents. For example, vapour pressure. We have learnt in Unit 5,
Class XI, that liquids at a given temperature vapourise and under
equilibrium conditions the pressure exerted
by the vapours of the liquid over the liquid
phase is called vapour pressure [Fig. 2.4 (a)].
In a pure liquid the entire surface is
occupied by the molecules of the liquid. If a
non-volatile solute is added to a solvent to
give a solution [Fig. 2.4.(b)], the vapour
pressure of the solution is solely from the
solvent alone. This vapour pressure of the
solution at a given temperature is found to
be lower than the vapour pressure of the
pure solvent at the same temperature. In
Fig. 2.4: Decrease in the vapour pressure of the the solution, the surface has both solute and
solvent on account of the presence of solvent molecules; thereby the fraction of the
solute in the solvent (a) evaporation of the surface covered by the solvent molecules gets
molecules of the solvent from its surface reduced. Consequently, the number of
is denoted by , (b) in a solution, solute
solvent molecules escaping from the surface
particles have been denoted by and they
is correspondingly reduced, thus, the vapour
also occupy part of the surface area.
pressure is also reduced.
The decrease in the vapour pressure of solvent depends on the
quantity of non-volatile solute present in the solution, irrespective of
its nature. For example, decrease in the vapour pressure of water by
adding 1.0 mol of sucrose to one kg of water is nearly similar to that
produced by adding 1.0 mol of urea to the same quantity of water at
the same temperature.
Raoult’s law in its general form can be stated as, for any solution
the partial vapour pressure of each volatile component in the
solution is directly proportional to its mole fraction.
In a binary solution, let us denote the solvent by 1 and solute by
2. When the solute is non-volatile, only the solvent molecules are
present in vapour phase and contribute to vapour pressure. Let p 1 be
Chemistry
44
2017-18Fig. 2.5
If a solution obeys
Raoult's law for all
concentrations, its
vapour pressure
would vary linearly
from zero to the
vapour pressure of
the pure solvent.
the vapour pressure of the solvent, x 1 be
0
its mole fraction, p i be its vapour pressure
in the pure state. Then according to
Raoult’s law
p 1 ∝ x 1
and
p 1 = x 1 p 1 0
(2.20)
The proportionality constant is equal
0
to the vapour pressure of pure solvent, p 1 .
A plot between the vapour pressure and
the mole fraction of the solvent is linear
(Fig. 2.5).
2.5 Ideal and Non-
ideal Solutions Liquid-liquid solutions can be classified into ideal and non-ideal
solutions on the basis of Raoult’s law.
2.5.1 Ideal
Solutions The solutions which obey Raoult’s law over the entire range of
concentration are known as ideal solutions. The ideal solutions have
two other important properties. The enthalpy of mixing of the pure
components to form the solution is zero and the volume of mixing is
also zero, i.e.,
∆ mix H = 0,
∆ mix V = 0
(2.21)
It means that no heat is absorbed or evolved when the components
are mixed. Also, the volume of solution would be equal to the sum of
volumes of the two components. At molecular level, ideal behaviour of
the solutions can be explained by considering two components A and
B. In pure components, the intermolecular attractive interactions will
be of types A-A and B-B, whereas in the binary solutions in addition
to these two interactions, A-B type of interactions will also be present.
If the intermolecular attractive forces between the A-A and B-B are
nearly equal to those between A-B, this leads to the formation of ideal
solution. A perfectly ideal solution is rare but some solutions are nearly
ideal in behaviour. Solution of n-hexane and n-heptane, bromoethane
and chloroethane, benzene and toluene, etc. fall into this category.
2.5.2 Non-ideal
Solutions
When a solution does not obey Raoult’s law over the entire range of
concentration, then it is called non-ideal solution. The vapour pressure
of such a solution is either higher or lower than that predicted by
Raoult’s law (equation 2.16). If it is higher, the solution exhibits positive
deviation and if it is lower, it exhibits negative deviation from Raoult’s
law. The plots of vapour pressure as a function of mole fractions
for such solutions are shown in Fig. 2.6.
The cause for these deviations lie in the nature of interactions at the
molecular level. In case of positive deviation from Raoult’s law, A-B
interactions are weaker than those between A-A or B-B, i.e., in this case
the intermolecular attractive forces between the solute-solvent molecules
are weaker than those between the solute-solute and solvent-solvent
molecules. This means that in such solutions, molecules of A (or B) will
find it easier to escape than in pure state. This will increase the vapour
45
Solutions
2017-18Fig.2.6
The vapour
pressures of two
component systems
as a function of
composition (a) a
solution that shows
positive deviation
from Raoult's law
and (b) a solution
that shows negative
deviation from
Raoult's law.
pressure and result in positive deviation. Mixtures of ethanol and acetone
behave in this manner. In pure ethanol, molecules are hydrogen bonded.
On adding acetone, its molecules get in between the host molecules and
break some of the hydrogen bonds between them. Due to weakening of
interactions, the solution shows positive deviation from Raoult’s law
[Fig. 2.6 (a)]. In a solution formed by adding carbon disulphide to
acetone, the dipolar interactions between solute-solvent molecules are
weaker than the respective interactions among the solute-solute and
solvent-solvent molecules. This solution also shows positive deviation.
In case of negative deviations from Raoult’s law, the intermolecular
attractive forces between A-A and B-B are weaker than those between
A-B and leads to decrease in vapour pressure resulting in negative
deviations. An example of this type is a mixture of phenol and aniline.
In this case the intermolecular hydrogen bonding between phenolic
proton and lone pair on nitrogen atom of aniline is stronger than the
respective intermolecular hydrogen bonding between similar
molecules. Similarly, a mixture of chloroform and acetone forms a
solution with negative deviation from Raoult’s law. This is because
chloroform molecule is able to form hydrogen bond with acetone
molecule as shown.
This decreases the escaping tendency of molecules for each
component and consequently the vapour pressure decreases resulting
in negative deviation from Raoult’s law [Fig. 2.6. (b)].
Some liquids on mixing, form azeotropes which are binary mixtures
having the same composition in liquid and vapour phase and boil at
a constant temperature. In such cases, it is not possible to separate the
components by fractional distillation. There are two types of azeotropes
called minimum boiling azeotrope and maximum boiling
azeotrope. The solutions which show a large positive deviation from
Raoult’s law form minimum boiling azeotrope at a specific composition.
Chemistry
46
2017-18For example, ethanol-water mixture (obtained by fermentation of sugars)
on fractional distillation gives a solution containing approximately 95%
by volume of ethanol. Once this composition, known as azeotrope
composition, has been achieved, the liquid and vapour have the same
composition, and no further separation occurs.
The solutions that show large negative deviation from Raoult’s law
form maximum boiling azeotrope at a specific composition. Nitric acid
and water is an example of this class of azeotrope. This azeotrope has
the approximate composition, 68% nitric acid and 32% water by mass,
with a boiling point of 393.5 K.
Intext Question
2.8 The vapour pressure of pure liquids A and B are 450 and 700 mm Hg
respectively, at 350 K . Find out the composition of the liquid mixture if total
vapour pressure is 600 mm Hg. Also find the composition of the vapour phase.
2.6 Colligative
Properties and
Determination
of Molar Mass We have learnt in Section 2.4.3 that the vapour pressure of solution
decreases when a non-volatile solute is added to a volatile solvent.
There are many properties of solutions which are connected with this
decrease of vapour pressure. These are: (1) relative lowering of vapour
pressure of the solvent (2) depression of freezing point of the solvent
(3) elevation of boiling point of the solvent and (4) osmotic pressure of
the solution. All these properties depend on the number of solute
particles irrespective of their nature relative to the total number
of particles present in the solution. Such properties are called
colligative properties (colligative: from Latin: co means together, ligare
means to bind). In the following Sections we will discuss these properties
one by one.
2.6.1 Relative
Lowering of
Vapour
Pressure We have learnt in Section 2.4.3 that the vapour pressure of a solvent in
solution is less than that of the pure solvent. Raoult established that the
lowering of vapour pressure depends only on the concentration of the
solute particles and it is independent of their identity. The equation (2.20)
given in Section 2.4.3 establishes a relation between vapour pressure of
the solution, mole fraction and vapour pressure of the solvent, i.e.,
p 1 = x 1 p 10
(2.22)
The reduction in the vapour pressure of solvent (∆p 1 ) is given as:
∆p 1 = p 10 – p 1 = p 10 - p 10 x 1
(2.23)
= p 10 (1 – x 1 )
Knowing that x 2 = 1 – x 1 , equation (2.23) reduces to
∆p 1 = x 2 p 10
(2.24)
In a solution containing several non-volatile solutes, the lowering of the
vapour pressure depends on the sum of the mole fraction of different solutes.
Equation (2.24) can be written as
∆p 1
p 1 0 − p 1
=
= x 2
p 1 0
p 1 0
(2.25)
47
Solutions
2017-18The expression on the left hand side of the equation as mentioned
earlier is called relative lowering of vapour pressure and is equal to
the mole fraction of the solute. The above equation can be written as:
p 1 0 – p 1
p 1 0
=
n 2 

n 2
 since x 2 = n + n 
n 1 + n 2 
1
2 
(2.26)
Here n 1 and n 2 are the number of moles of solvent and solute
respectively present in the solution. For dilute solutions n 2 < < n 1 ,
hence neglecting n 2 in the denominator we have
p 1 0 − p 1
p 1 0
=
n 2
n 1
(2.27)
w × M 1
p 1 0 - p 1
= 2
(2.28)
0
M 2 × w 1
p 1
Here w 1 and w 2 are the masses and M 1 and M 2 are the molar masses
of the solvent and solute respectively.
From this equation (2.28), knowing all other quantities, the molar
mass of solute (M 2 ) can be calculated.
or
Example 2.6 The vapour pressure of pure benzene at a certain temperature is 0.850
bar. A non-volatile, non-electrolyte solid weighing 0.5 g when added to
39.0 g of benzene (molar mass 78 g mol -1 ). Vapour pressure of the solution,
then, is 0.845 bar. What is the molar mass of the solid substance?
Solution The various quantities known to us are as follows:
p 10 = 0.850 bar; p = 0.845 bar; M 1 = 78 g mol –1 ; w 2 = 0.5 g; w 1 = 39 g
Substituting these values in equation (2.28), we get
0.5 g × 78 g mol –1
0.850 bar – 0.845 bar
=
M 2 × 39 g
0.850 bar
Therefore, M 2 = 170 g mol –1
2.6.2 Elevation of
Boiling Point
Chemistry
We have learnt in Unit 5, Class XI, that the vapour pressure of a
liquid increases with increase of temperature. It boils at the
temperature at which its vapour pressure is equal to the atmospheric
pressure. For example, water boils at 373.15 K (100° C) because at
this temperature the vapour pressure of water is 1.013 bar (1
atmosphere). We have also learnt in the last section that vapour
pressure of the solvent decreases in the presence of non-volatile solute.
Fig. 2.7 depicts the variation of vapour pressure of the pure solvent
and solution as a function of temperature. For example, the vapour
pressure of an aqueous solution of sucrose is less than 1.013 bar at
373.15 K. In order to make this solution boil, its vapour pressure
must be increased to 1.013 bar by raising the temperature above the
boiling temperature of the pure solvent (water). Thus, the boiling
48
2017-18point of a solution is always higher than that of
the boiling point of the pure solvent in which the
solution is prepared as shown in Fig. 2.7. Similar
to lowering of vapour pressure, the elevation of
boiling point also depends on the number of
solute molecules rather than their nature. A
solution of 1 mol of sucrose in 1000 g of water
boils at 373.52 K at one atmospheric pressure.
1.013 bar
or
Let T b 0 be the boiling point of pure solvent and
T b be the boiling point of solution. The increase in
the boiling point ∆ T b = T b − T b 0 is known as
elevation of boiling point.
Fig. 2.7: The vapour pressure curve for
solution lies below the curve for pure
water. The diagram shows that ∆T b
denotes the elevation of boiling
point of a solvent in solution.
Experiments have shown that for dilute
solutions the elevation of boiling point (∆T b ) is
directly proportional to the molal concentration of
the solute in a solution. Thus
or
∆T b ∝ m (2.29)
∆T b = K b m (2.30)
Here m (molality) is the number of moles of solute dissolved in 1 kg
of solvent and the constant of proportionality, K b is called Boiling Point
Elevation Constant or Molal Elevation Constant (Ebullioscopic
Constant). The unit of K b is K kg mol -1 . Values of K b for some common
solvents are given in Table 2.3. If w 2 gram of solute of molar mass M 2
is dissolved in w 1 gram of solvent, then molality, m of the solution is
given by the expression:
m
=
w 2 /M 2
1000 × w 2
=
w 1 /1000
M 2 × w 1
(2.31)
Substituting the value of molality in equation (2.30) we get
∆T b = K b × 1000 × w 2
M 2 × w 1 (2.32)
M 2 = 1000 × w 2 × K b
∆ T b × w 1 (2.33)
Thus, in order to determine M 2 , molar mass of the solute, known
mass of solute in a known mass of the solvent is taken and ∆T b is
determined experimentally for a known solvent whose K b value is known.
18 g of glucose, C 6 H 12 O 6 , is dissolved in 1 kg of water in a saucepan.
At what temperature will water boil at 1.013 bar? K b for water is 0.52
K kg mol -1 . Example 2.7
Moles of glucose = 18 g/ 180 g mol –1 = 0.1 mol
Number of kilograms of solvent = 1 kg
Thus molality of glucose solution = 0.1 mol kg -1
For water, change in boiling point Solution
49
Solutions
2017-18Ä T b = K b × m = 0.52 K kg mol –1 × 0.1 mol kg –1 = 0.052 K
Since water boils at 373.15 K at 1.013 bar pressure, therefore, the
boiling point of solution will be 373.15 + 0.052 = 373.202 K.
Example 2.8 The boiling point of benzene is 353.23 K. When 1.80 g of a non-volatile
solute was dissolved in 90 g of benzene, the boiling point is raised to
354.11 K. Calculate the molar mass of the solute. K b for benzene is 2.53
K kg mol –1
Solution The elevation (Ä T b ) in the boiling point = 354.11 K – 353. 23 K = 0.88 K
Substituting these values in expression (2.33) we get
2.53 K kg mol –1 × 1.8 g × 1000 g kg –1
= 58 g mol –1
0.88 K × 90 g
Therefore, molar mass of the solute, M 2 = 58 g mol –1
M 2 =
2.6.3 Depression The lowering of vapour pressure of a solution causes a lowering of the
of Freezing freezing point compared to that of the pure solvent (Fig. 2 8). We
Point
know that at the freezing point of a substance, the solid phase is in
dynamic equilibrium with the liquid phase. Thus,
the freezing point of a substance may be defined
as the temperature at which the vapour pressure
of the substance in its liquid phase is equal to its
vapour pressure in the solid phase. A solution
will freeze when its vapour pressure equals the
vapour pressure of the pure solid solvent as is
clear from Fig. 2.8. According to Raoult’s law,
when a non-volatile solid is added to the solvent
its vapour pressure decreases and now it would
become equal to that of solid solvent at lower
temperature. Thus, the freezing point of the
solvent decreases.
Let T f 0 be the freezing point of pure solvent
Fig. 2.8: Diagram showing ∆T f , depression
of the freezing point of a solvent in
a solution.
and T f be its freezing point when non-volatile
solute is dissolved in it. The decrease in freezing
point.
∆ T f = T f 0 − T f is known as depression in
freezing point.
Similar to elevation of boiling point, depression of freezing point (∆T f )
for dilute solution (ideal solution) is directly proportional to molality,
m of the solution. Thus,
∆T f
or
∝ m
∆T f = K f m
(2.34)
The proportionality constant, K f , which depends on the nature of the
solvent is known as Freezing Point Depression Constant or Molal
Chemistry
50
2017-18Depression Constant or Cryoscopic Constant. The unit of K f is K kg
mol -1 . Values of K f for some common solvents are listed in Table 2.3.
If w 2 gram of the solute having molar mass as M 2 , present in w 1
gram of solvent, produces the depression in freezing point ∆T f of the
solvent then molality of the solute is given by the equation (2.31).
m
=
w 2 / M 2
w 1 /1000
(2.31)
Substituting this value of molality in equation (2.34) we get:
∆T f = K f × w 2 / M 2
w 1 /1000 ∆T f = K f × w 2 × 1000
M 2 × w 1 (2.35)
M 2 = K f × w 2 × 1000
∆ T f × w 1 (2.36)
Thus for determining the molar mass of the solute we should know
the quantities w 1 , w 2 , ∆T f , along with the molal freezing point depression
constant.
The values of K f and K b , which depend upon the nature of the
solvent, can be ascertained from the following relations.
K f R × M 1 × T f 2
=
1000 × ∆ fus H (2.37)
K b R × M 1 × T b 2
= 1000 × ∆ H
vap (2.38)
Here the symbols R and M 1 stand for the gas constant and molar
mass of the solvent, respectively and T f and T b denote the freezing point
and the boiling point of the pure solvent respectively in kelvin. Further,
∆ fus H and ∆ vap H represent the enthalpies for the fusion and vapourisation
of the solvent, respectively.
Table 2.3: Molal Boiling Point Elevation and Freezing Point
Depression Constants for Some Solvents
K b /K kg mol -1
f. p./K
K f /K kg mol -1
Solvent b. p./K Water 373.15 0.52 273.0 1.86
Ethanol 351.5 1.20 155.7 1.99
Cyclohexane 353.74 2.79 279.55 Benzene 353.3 2.53 278.6 5.12
Chloroform 334.4 3.63 209.6 4.79
Carbon tetrachloride 350.0 5.03 250.5 Carbon disulphide 319.4 2.34 164.2 3.83
Diethyl ether 307.8 2.02 156.9 1.79
Acetic acid 391.1 2.93 290.0 3.90
20.00
31.8
51
Solutions
2017-18Example 2.9 45 g of ethylene glycol (C H O ) is mixed with 600 g of water. Calculate
2 6 2
(a) the freezing point depression and (b) the freezing point of the solution.
Solution
Depression in freezing point is related to the molality, therefore, the molality
moles of ethylene glycol
of the solution with respect to ethylene glycol = mass of water in kilogram
Moles of ethylene glycol =
Mass of water in kg =
45 g
= 0.73 mol
62 g mol − 1
600g
= 0.6 kg
1000g kg − 1
Hence molality of ethylene glycol =
0.73 mol
= 1.2 mol kg –1
0.60 kg
Therefore freezing poi nt depression,
Ä T f = 1.86 K kg mol –1 × 1.2 mol kg –1 = 2.2 K
Freezing point of the aqueous solution = 273.15 K – 2.2 K = 270.95 K
Example 2.10 1.00 g of a non-electrolyte solute dissolved in 50 g of benzene lowered the
freezing point of benzene by 0.40 K. The freezing point depression constant
of benzene is 5.12 K kg mol –1 . Find the molar mass of the solute.
Solution
Substituting the values of various terms involved in equation (2.36) we get,
5.12 K kg mol − 1 × 1.00 g × 1000 g kg − 1
M 2 =
= 256 g mol -1
0.40 × 50 g
Thus, molar mass of the solute = 256 g mol -1
2.6.4 Osmosis and
Osmotic
Pressure
Fig. 2.9
Level of solution
rises in the thistle
funnel due to
osmosis of solvent.
Chemistry
There are many phenomena which we observe in nature or at home.
For example, raw mangoes shrivel when pickled in brine (salt water);
wilted flowers revive when placed in fresh water, blood cells collapse
when suspended in saline water, etc. If we look into these processes we
find one thing common in all,
that is, all these substances
are bound by membranes.
These membranes can be of
animal or vegetable origin
and these occur naturally
such as pig’s bladder or
parchment or can be
synthetic such as cellophane.
These membranes appear to
be continuous sheets or
films, yet they contain a
network of submicroscopic
holes or pores. Small solvent
52
2017-18molecules, like water, can pass through these holes but the passage of
bigger molecules like solute is hindered. Membranes having this kind
of properties are known as semipermeable membranes (SPM).
Assume that only solvent molecules can pass through these semi-
permeable membranes. If this membrane is placed between the solvent
and solution as shown in Fig. 2.9, the solvent molecules will flow through
the membrane from pure solvent to the solution. This process of flow
of the solvent is called osmosis.
The flow will continue till the equilibrium is attained. The flow of the
solvent from its side to solution side across a semipermeable membrane
can be stopped if some extra pressure is applied on the solution. This
pressure that just stops the flow of solvent is called osmotic
pressure of the solution. The flow of solvent from dilute solution to
the concentrated solution across a semipermeable membrane is due to
osmosis. The important point to be kept in mind is that solvent molecules
always flow from lower concentration to higher concentration of solution.
The osmotic pressure has been found to depend on the concentration
of the solution.
The osmotic pressure of a solution is the
excess pressure that must be applied to a
solution to prevent osmosis, i.e., to stop the
passage of solvent molecules through a
semipermeable membrane into the solution. This
is illustrated in Fig. 2.10. Osmotic pressure is a
colligative property as it depends on the number
of solute molecules and not on their identity.
For dilute solutions, it has been found
experimentally that osmotic pressure is
proportional to the molarity, C of the
solution at a given temperature T. Thus:
Π = C R T
(2.39)
Fig. 2.10: The excess pressure equal to the
osmotic pressure must be applied on
the solution side to prevent osmosis.
Here Π is the osmotic pressure and R is the
gas constant.
Π = (n 2 /V) R T
(2.40)
Here V is volume of a solution in litres containing n 2 moles of solute.
If w 2 grams of solute, of molar mass, M 2 is present in the solution, then
n 2 = w 2 / M 2 and we can write,
Π V =
or
w 2 R T
(2.41)
M 2
M 2 =
w 2 R T
(2.42)
∏ V
Thus, knowing the quantities w 2 , T, Π and V we can calculate the
molar mass of the solute.
Measurement of osmotic pressure provides another method of
determining molar masses of solutes. This method is widely used to
determine molar masses of proteins, polymers and other
53
Solutions
2017-18macromolecules. The osmotic pressure method has the advantage over
other methods as pressure measurement is around the room
temperature and the molarity of the solution is used instead of molality.
As compared to other colligative properties, its magnitude is large
even for very dilute solutions. The technique of osmotic pressure for
determination of molar mass of solutes is particularly useful for
biomolecules as they are generally not stable at higher temperatures
and polymers have poor solubility.
Two solutions having same osmotic pressure at a given
temperature are called isotonic solutions. When such solutions
are separated by semipermeable membrane no osmosis occurs
between them. For example, the osmotic pressure associated with
the fluid inside the blood cell is equivalent to that of 0.9% (mass/
volume) sodium chloride solution, called normal saline solution and
it is safe to inject intravenously. On the other hand, if we place the
cells in a solution containing more than 0.9% (mass/volume) sodium
chloride, water will flow out of the cells and they would shrink. Such
a solution is called hypertonic. If the salt concentration is less than
0.9% (mass/volume), the solution is said to be hypotonic. In this
case, water will flow into the cells if placed in this solution and they
would swell.
Example 2.11 200 cm 3 of an aqueous solution of a protein contains 1.26 g of the
protein. The osmotic pressure of such a solution at 300 K is found to
be 2.57 × 10 -3 bar. Calculate the molar mass of the protein.
Solution The various quantities known to us are as follows: Π = 2.57 × 10 –3 bar,
V = 200 cm 3 = 0.200 litre
T = 300 K
R = 0.083 L bar mol -1 K -1
Substituting these values in equation (2.42) we get
M 2 =
1.26 g × 0.083 L bar K − 1 mol − 1 × 300 K
= 61,022 g mol -1
2.57×10 − 3 bar × 0.200 L
The phenomena mentioned in the beginning of this section can be
explained on the basis of osmosis. A raw mango placed in concentrated
salt solution loses water via osmosis and shrivel into pickle. Wilted
flowers revive when placed in fresh water. A carrot that has become
limp because of water loss into the atmosphere can be placed into the
water making it firm once again. Water will move into its cells through
osmosis. When placed in water containing less than 0.9% (mass/
volume) salt, blood cells swell due to flow of water in them by osmosis.
People taking a lot of salt or salty food experience water retention in
tissue cells and intercellular spaces because of osmosis. The resulting
Chemistry
54
2017-18puffiness or swelling is called edema. Water movement from soil into
plant roots and subsequently into upper portion of the plant is partly
due to osmosis. The preservation of meat by salting and of fruits by
adding sugar protects against bacterial action. Through the process
of osmosis, a bacterium on salted meat or candid fruit loses water,
shrivels and dies.
2.6.5 Reverse
Osmosis and
Water
Purification
The direction of osmosis can be reversed if a pressure larger than the
osmotic pressure is applied to the solution side. That is, now the
pure solvent flows out of the solution through the semi permeable
membrane. This phenomenon is called reverse osmosis and is of
great practical utility. Reverse osmosis is used in desalination of sea
water. A schematic set up for the process is shown in Fig. 2.11.
When pressure more than osmotic pressure is
applied, pure water is squeezed out of the sea
water through the membrane. A variety of
Π
polymer membranes are available for this
purpose.
Fig. 2.11: Reverse osmosis occurs when a
pressure larger than the osmotic
pressure is applied to the solution.
The pressure required for the reverse osmosis
is quite high. A workable porous membrane is a
film of cellulose acetate placed over a suitable
support. Cellulose acetate is permeable to water
but impermeable to impurities and ions present
in sea water. These days many countries use
desalination plants to meet their potable water
requirements.
Intext Questions
2.9
Vapour pressure of pure water at 298 K is 23.8 mm Hg. 50 g of urea
(NH 2 CONH 2 ) is dissolved in 850 g of water. Calculate the vapour pressure
of water for this solution and its relative lowering.
2.10 Boiling point of water at 750 mm Hg is 99.63°C. How much sucrose is to
be added to 500 g of water such that it boils at 100°C.
2.11 Calculate the mass of ascorbic acid (Vitamin C, C 6 H 8 O 6 ) to be dissolved in
75 g of acetic acid to lower its melting point by 1.5°C. K f = 3.9 K kg mol -1 .
2.12 Calculate the osmotic pressure in pascals exerted by a solution prepared
by dissolving 1.0 g of polymer of molar mass 185,000 in 450 mL of water
at 37°C.
2.7 Abnormal
Molar
Masses
We know that ionic compounds when dissolved in water dissociate into
cations and anions. For example, if we dissolve one mole of KCl (74.5 g)
in water, we expect one mole each of K + and Cl – ions to be released in
the solution. If this happens, there would be two moles of particles in
the solution. If we ignore interionic attractions, one mole of KCl in
one kg of water would be expected to increase the boiling point by
2 × 0.52 K = 1.04 K. Now if we did not know about the degree of
55
Solutions
2017-18dissociation, we could be led to conclude that the mass of 2 mol particles
is 74.5 g and the mass of one mole of KCl would be 37.25 g. This
brings into light the rule that, when there is dissociation of solute into
ions, the experimentally determined molar mass is always lower than
the true value.
2 CH 3 COOH  (CH 3 COOH) 2
Molecules of ethanoic acid (acetic acid) dimerise in
benzene due to hydrogen bonding. This normally happens
in solvents of low dielectric constant. In this case the number
of particles is reduced due to dimerisation. Association of
molecules is depicted as follows:
It can be undoubtedly stated here that if all the molecules of ethanoic
acid associate in benzene, then ∆T b or ∆T f for ethanoic acid will be half
of the normal value. The molar mass calculated on the basis of this ∆T b
or ∆T f will, therefore, be twice the expected value. Such a molar mass
that is either lower or higher than the expected or normal value is called
as abnormal molar mass.
In 1880 van’t Hoff introduced a factor i, known as the van’t Hoff
factor, to account for the extent of dissociation or association. This
factor i is defined as:
i =
=
i =
Normal molar mass
Abnormal molar mass
Observed colligative property
Calculated colligative property
Total number of moles of particles after association/dissociation
Number of moles of particles before association/dissociation
Here abnormal molar mass is the experimentally determined molar
mass and calculated colligative properties are obtained by assuming
that the non-volatile solute is neither associated nor dissociated. In
case of association, value of i is less than unity while for dissociation it
is greater than unity. For example, the value of i for aqueous KCl
solution is close to 2, while the value for ethanoic acid in benzene is
nearly 0.5.
Inclusion of van’t Hoff factor modifies the equations for colligative
properties as follows:
Relative lowering of vapour pressure of solvent,
p 1 o – p 1
n
= i . 2
o
n 1
p 1
Elevation of Boiling point, ∆T b
= i K b m
Depression of Freezing point, ∆T f = i K f m
Osmotic pressure of solution, Π
Chemistry
= i n 2 R T / V
56
2017-18Table 2.4 depicts values of the factor, i for several strong electrolytes.
For KCl, NaCl and MgSO 4 , i approach 2 as the solution becomes very
dilute. As expected, the value of i gets close to 3 for K 2 SO 4 .
Table 2.4: Values of van’t Hoff factor, i, at Various Concentrations
for NaCl, KCl, MgSO 4 and K 2 SO 4 .
* Values of i
Salt
van’t Hoff Factor i for complete
dissociation of solute
0.1 m 0.01 m 0.001 m NaCl 1.87 1.94 1.97 2.00
KCl 1.85 1.94 1.98 2.00
MgSO 4 1.21 1.53 1.82 2.00
K 2 SO 4 2.32 2.70 2.84 3.00
* represent i values for incomplete dissociation.
2 g of benzoic acid (C 6 H 5 COOH) dissolved in 25 g of benzene shows a
depression in freezing point equal to 1.62 K. Molal depression constant
for benzene is 4.9 K kg mol –1 . What is the percentage association of acid
if it forms dimer in solution? Example 2.12
The given quantities are: w 2 = 2 g; K f = 4.9 K kg mol –1 ; w 1 = 25 g,
Ä T f = 1.62 K Solution
Substituting these values in equation (2.36) we get:
M 2 =
4.9 K kg mol –1 × 2 g × 1000 g kg –1
= 241.98 g mol –1
25 g × 1.62 K
Thus, experimental molar mass of benzoic acid in benzene is
= 241.98 g mol –1
Now consider the following equilibrium for the acid:
2 C 6 H 5 COOH  (C 6 H 5 COOH) 2
If x represents the degree of association of the solute then we would
have (1 – x ) mol of benzoic acid left in unassociated form and
x
correspondingly
as associated moles of benzoic acid at equilibrium.
2
Therefore, total number of moles of particles at equilibrium is:
x
x
= 1 −
2
2
Thus, total number of moles of particles at equilibrium equals van’t Hoff
factor i.
Normal molar mass
But i =
Abnormal molar mass
1 − x +
57
Solutions
2017-18122 g mol − 1
=
241.98 g mol − 1
x
122
= 1 − 0.504 = 0.496
= 1 −
2
241.98
or
or
x = 2 × 0 .496 = 0.992
Therefore, degree of association of benzoic acid in benzene is 99.2 %.
Example 2.13 0.6 mL of acetic acid (CH 3 COOH), having density 1.06 g mL –1 , is
dissolved in 1 litre of water. The depression in freezing point
observed for this strength of acid was 0.0205°C. Calculate the van’t
Hoff factor and the dissociation constant of acid.
0.6 mL × 1.06 g mL − 1
60 g mol − 1
= 0.0106 mol = n
Solution Number of moles of acetic acid
Molality =
=
0.0106 mol
= 0.0106 mol kg –1
1000 mL × 1 g mL − 1
Using equation (2.35)
∆T f = 1.86 K kg mol –1 × 0.0106 mol kg –1 = 0.0197 K
Observed freezing point
0.0205 K
=
= 1.041
Calculated freezing point
0.0197 K
Acetic acid is a weak electrolyte and will dissociate into two ions:
acetate and hydrogen ions per molecule of acetic acid. If x is the
degree of dissociation of acetic acid, then we would have n (1 – x)
moles of undissociated acetic acid, nx moles of CH 3 COO – and nx
moles of H + ions,
van’t Hoff Factor (i) =
CH 3 COOH 
n mol
n ( 1 − x )
H + + CH 3 COO −
0
nx mol
0
nx mol
Thus total moles of particles are: n(1 – x + x + x) = n(1 + x)
i =
n ( 1 + x )
= 1 + x = 1.041
n
Thus degree of dissociation of acetic acid = x = 1.041– 1.000 = 0.041
Then
[CH 3 COOH] = n(1 – x) = 0.0106 (1 – 0.041),
[CH 3 COO – ] = nx = 0.0106 × 0.041, [H + ] = nx = 0.0106 × 0.041.
K a =
[ CH 3 COO − ][ H + ]
0.0106 × 0.041 × 0.0106 × 0.041
=
[ CH 3 COOH ]
0.0106 (1.00 − 0.041)
= 1.86 × 10 –5
Chemistry
58
2017-18Summary
A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. Solutions are
classified as solid, liquid and gaseous solutions. The concentration of a solution is
expressed in terms of mole fraction, molarity, molality and in percentages. The
dissolution of a gas in a liquid is governed by Henry’s law, according to which, at a
given temperature, the solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to
the partial pressure of the gas. The vapour pressure of the solvent is lowered by
the presence of a non-volatile solute in the solution and this lowering of vapour
pressure of the solvent is governed by Raoult’s law, according to which the relative
lowering of vapour pressure of the solvent over a solution is equal to the mole
fraction of a non-volatile solute present in the solution. However, in a binary
liquid solution, if both the components of the solution are volatile then another
form of Raoult’s law is used. Mathematically, this form of the Raoult’s law is stated
0
0
as: p total = p 1 x 1 + p 2 x 2 . Solutions which obey Raoult’s law over the entire range
of concentration are called ideal solutions. Two types of deviations from Raoult’s
law, called positive and negative deviations are observed. Azeotropes arise due to
very large deviations from Raoult’s law.
The properties of solutions which depend on the number of solute particles and
are independent of their chemical identity are called colligative properties. These
are lowering of vapour pressure, elevation of boiling point, depression of freezing
point and osmotic pressure. The process of osmosis can be reversed if a pressure
higher than the osmotic pressure is applied to the solution. Colligative properties
have been used to determine the molar mass of solutes. Solutes which dissociate in
solution exhibit molar mass lower than the actual molar mass and those which
associate show higher molar mass than their actual values.
Quantitatively, the extent to which a solute is dissociated or associated can be
expressed by van’t Hoff factor i. This factor has been defined as ratio of normal
molar mass to experimentally determined molar mass or as the ratio of observed
colligative property to the calculated colligative property.
Exercises
2.1 Define the term solution. How many types of solutions are formed? Write briefly
about each type with an example.
2.2 Give an example of a solid solution in which the solute is a gas.
2.3 Define the following terms:
(i) Mole fraction
2.4
(ii) Molality
(iii) Molarity
(iv) Mass percentage.
Concentrated nitric acid used in laboratory work is 68% nitric acid by mass in
aqueous solution. What should be the molarity of such a sample of the acid if
the density of the solution is 1.504 g mL –1 ?
59
Solutions
2017-182.5 A solution of glucose in water is labelled as 10% w/w, what would be the
molality and mole fraction of each component in the solution? If the density of
solution is 1.2 g mL –1 , then what shall be the molarity of the solution?
2.6 How many mL of 0.1 M HCl are required to react completely with 1 g mixture
of Na 2 CO 3 and NaHCO 3 containing equimolar amounts of both?
2.7 A solution is obtained by mixing 300 g of 25% solution and 400 g of 40%
solution by mass. Calculate the mass percentage of the resulting solution.
2.8 An antifreeze solution is prepared from 222.6 g of ethylene glycol (C 2 H 6 O 2 ) and
200 g of water. Calculate the molality of the solution. If the density of the
solution is 1.072 g mL –1 , then what shall be the molarity of the solution?
2.9 A sample of drinking water was found to be severely contaminated with
chloroform (CHCl 3 ) supposed to be a carcinogen. The level of contamination
was 15 ppm (by mass):
(i) express this in percent by mass
(ii) determine the molality of chloroform in the water sample.
2.10 What role does the molecular interaction play in a solution of alcohol and water?
2.11 Why do gases always tend to be less soluble in liquids as the temperature
is raised?
2.12 State Henry’s law and mention some important applications?
2.13 The partial pressure of ethane over a solution containing 6.56 × 10 –3 g of
ethane is 1 bar. If the solution contains 5.00 × 10 –2 g of ethane, then what
shall be the partial pressure of the gas?
2.14 What is meant by positive and negative deviations from Raoult's law and how is
the sign of ∆ mix H related to positive and negative deviations from Raoult's law?
2.15 An aqueous solution of 2% non-volatile solute exerts a pressure of 1.004 bar
at the normal boiling point of the solvent. What is the molar mass of the solute?
2.16 Heptane and octane form an ideal solution. At 373 K, the vapour pressures of
the two liquid components are 105.2 kPa and 46.8 kPa respectively. What will
be the vapour pressure of a mixture of 26.0 g of heptane and 35 g of octane?
2.17 The vapour pressure of water is 12.3 kPa at 300 K. Calculate vapour pressure
of 1 molal solution of a non-volatile solute in it.
2.18 Calculate the mass of a non-volatile solute (molar mass 40 g mol –1 ) which
should be dissolved in 114 g octane to reduce its vapour pressure to 80%.
2.19 A solution containing 30 g of non-volatile solute exactly in 90 g of water has a
vapour pressure of 2.8 kPa at 298 K. Further, 18 g of water is then added to
the solution and the new vapour pressure becomes 2.9 kPa at 298 K. Calculate:
(i) molar mass of the solute
(ii) vapour pressure of water at 298 K.
2.20 A 5% solution (by mass) of cane sugar in water has freezing point of 271K.
Calculate the freezing point of 5% glucose in water if freezing point of pure
water is 273.15 K.
2.21 Two elements A and B form compounds having formula AB 2 and AB 4 . When
dissolved in 20 g of benzene (C 6 H 6 ), 1 g of AB 2 lowers the freezing point by
2.3 K whereas 1.0 g of AB 4 lowers it by 1.3 K. The molar depression constant
for benzene is 5.1 K kg mol –1 . Calculate atomic masses of A and B.
Chemistry
60
2017-182.22 At 300 K, 36 g of glucose present in a litre of its solution has an osmotic pressure
of 4.98 bar. If the osmotic pressure of the solution is 1.52 bars at the same
temperature, what would be its concentration?
2.23 Suggest the most important type of intermolecular attractive interaction in
the following pairs.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
n-hexane and n-octane
I 2 and CCl 4
NaClO 4 and water
methanol and acetone
acetonitrile (CH 3 CN) and acetone (C 3 H 6 O).
2.24 Based on solute-solvent interactions, arrange the following in order of increasing
solubility in n-octane and explain. Cyclohexane, KCl, CH 3 OH, CH 3 CN.
2.25 Amongst the following compounds, identify which are insoluble, partially
soluble and highly soluble in water?
(i) phenol
(iv) ethylene glycol
(ii) toluene
(v) chloroform
(iii) formic acid
(vi) pentanol.
2.26 If the density of some lake water is 1.25g mL –1 and contains 92 g of Na + ions per
kg of water, calculate the molality of Na + ions in the lake.
2.27 If the solubility product of CuS is 6 × 10 –16 , calculate the maximum molarity of
CuS in aqueous solution.
2.28 Calculate the mass percentage of aspirin (C 9 H 8 O 4 ) in acetonitrile (CH 3 CN) when
6.5 g of C 9 H 8 O 4 is dissolved in 450 g of CH 3 CN.
2.29 Nalorphene (C 19 H 21 NO 3 ), similar to morphine, is used to combat withdrawal
symptoms in narcotic users. Dose of nalorphene generally given is 1.5 mg.
Calculate the mass of 1.5 – 10 –3 m aqueous solution required for the above dose.
2.30 Calculate the amount of benzoic acid (C 6 H 5 COOH) required for preparing 250
mL of 0.15 M solution in methanol.
2.31 The depression in freezing point of water observed for the same amount of
acetic acid, trichloroacetic acid and trifluoroacetic acid increases in the order
given above. Explain briefly.
2.32 Calculate the depression in the freezing point of water when 10 g of
CH 3 CH 2 CHClCOOH is added to 250 g of water. K a = 1.4 × 10 –3 , K f = 1.86
K kg mol –1 .
2.33 19.5 g of CH 2 FCOOH is dissolved in 500 g of water. The depression in the freezing
point of water observed is 1.0 0 C. Calculate the van’t Hoff factor and dissociation
constant of fluoroacetic acid.
2.34 Vapour pressure of water at 293 K is 17.535 mm Hg. Calculate the vapour
pressure of water at 293 K when 25 g of glucose is dissolved in 450 g of water.
2.35 Henry’s law constant for the molality of methane in benzene at 298 K is
4.27 × 10 5 mm Hg. Calculate the solubility of methane in benzene at 298 K
under 760 mm Hg.
2.36 100 g of liquid A (molar mass 140 g mol –1 ) was dissolved in 1000 g of liquid B
(molar mass 180 g mol –1 ). The vapour pressure of pure liquid B was found to be
500 torr. Calculate the vapour pressure of pure liquid A and its vapour pressure
in the solution if the total vapour pressure of the solution is 475 Torr.
61
Solutions
2017-182.37
Vapour pressures of pure acetone and chloroform at 328 K are 741.8 mm
Hg and 632.8 mm Hg respectively. Assuming that they form ideal solution
over the entire range of composition, plot p total , p chloroform , and p acetone as a
function of x acetone . The experimental data observed for different compositions
of mixture is:
100 x x acetone 0 11.8
p acetone /mm Hg 0 54.9 110.1 202.4 322.7 405.9 454.1 521.1
p chloroform /mm Hg
23.4
36.0
50.8
58.2
64.5
72.1
632.8 548.1 469.4 359.7 257.7 193.6 161.2 120.7
Plot this data also on the same graph paper. Indicate whether it has positive
deviation or negative deviation from the ideal solution.
2.38 Benzene and toluene form ideal solution over the entire range of composition.
The vapour pressure of pure benzene and toluene at 300 K are 50.71 mm Hg
and 32.06 mm Hg respectively. Calculate the mole fraction of benzene in vapour
phase if 80 g of benzene is mixed with 100 g of toluene.
2.39 The air is a mixture of a number of gases. The major components are oxygen
and nitrogen with approximate proportion of 20% is to 79% by volume at 298
K. The water is in equilibrium with air at a pressure of 10 atm. At 298 K if the
Henry’s law constants for oxygen and nitrogen at 298 K are 3.30 × 10 7 mm and
6.51 × 10 7 mm respectively, calculate the composition of these gases in water.
2.40 Determine the amount of CaCl 2 (i = 2.47) dissolved in 2.5 litre of water such
that its osmotic pressure is 0.75 atm at 27° C.
2.41 Determine the osmotic pressure of a solution prepared by dissolving 25 mg of
K 2 SO 4 in 2 litre of water at 25° C, assuming that it is completely dissociated.
Answers to Some Intext Questions
2.1 C 6 H 6 = 15.28%, CCl 4 = 84.72%
2.2 0.459, 0.541
2.3 0.024 M, 0.03 M
2.4 36.946 g
2.5 1.5 mol kg –1 , 1.45 mol L –1 0.0263
2.9 23.4 mm Hg
2.10 121.67 g
2.11 5.077 g
2.12 30.96 Pa
Chemistry
62
2017-18
Unit
3
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• describe an electrochemical cell
and differentiate between galvanic
and electrolytic cells;
• apply Nernst equation for
calculating the emf of galvanic cell
and define standard potential of
the cell;
• derive relation between standard
potential of the cell, Gibbs energy
of cell reaction and its equilibrium
constant;
• define resistivity (ρ), conductivity
(κ) and molar conductivity ( L m ) of
ionic solutions;
• differentiate
between
ionic
(electrolytic) and electronic
conductivity;
• describe
the
method
for
measurement of conductivity of
electrolytic
solutions
and
calculation of their molar
conductivity;
• justify
the
variation
of
conductivity
and
molar
conductivity of solutions with
change in their concentration and
•
•
•
•
define Λ ° m (molar conductivity at
zero concentration or infinite
dilution);
enunciate Kohlrausch law and
learn its applications;
understand quantitative aspects
of electrolysis;
describe the construction of some
primary and secondary batteries
and fuel cells;
explain
corrosion
as
an
electrochemical process.
Electr
ochemistr
y
Electrochemistr
ochemistry
Chemical reactions can be used to produce electrical energy,
conversely, electrical energy can be used to carry out chemical
reactions that do not proceed spontaneously.
Electrochemistry is the study of production of
electricity from energy released during spontaneous
chemical reactions and the use of electrical energy
to bring about non-spontaneous chemical
transformations. The subject is of importance both
for theoretical and practical considerations. A large
number of metals, sodium hydroxide, chlorine,
fluorine and many other chemicals are produced by
electrochemical methods. Batteries and fuel cells
convert chemical energy into electrical energy and are
used on a large scale in various instruments and
devices. The reactions carried out electrochemically
can be energy efficient and less polluting. Therefore,
study of electrochemistry is important for creating new
technologies that are ecofriendly. The transmission of
sensory signals through cells to brain and vice versa
and communication between the cells are known to
have electrochemical origin. Electrochemistry, is
therefore, a very vast and interdisciplinary subject. In
this Unit, we will cover only some of its important
elementary aspects.3 . 1 Electrochemical
Cells
In Class XI, Unit 8, we had studied the construction and functioning
of Daniell cell (Fig. 3.1). This cell converts the chemical energy liberated
during the redox reaction
Zn(s) + Cu 2+ (aq) → Zn 2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
(3.1)
to electrical energy and has an electrical
potential equal to 1.1 V when concentration
of Zn 2+ and Cu 2+ ions is unity (1 mol dm –3 ) * .
Such a device is called a galvanic or a
voltaic cell.
If an external opposite potential is applied
in the galvanic cell [Fig. 3.2(a)] and increased
slowly, we find that the reaction continues to
take place till the opposing voltage reaches
the value 1.1 V [Fig. 3.2(b)] when, the reaction
stops altogether and no current flows through
the cell. Any further increase in the external
potential again starts the reaction but in the
opposite direction [Fig. 3.2(c)]. It now functions
as an electrolytic cell, a device for using
electrical energy to carry non-spontaneous
chemical reactions. Both types of cells are
Fig. 3.1: Daniell cell having electrodes of zinc and
quite important and we shall study some of
copper dipping in the solutions of their
their salient features in the following pages.
respective salts.
E ext < 1.1V
E ext = 1.1V
(b)
(a)
e
current cathode
anode
Zn
-ve
Cu
+ve
salt
bridge
ZnSO 4
Cu
ZnSO 4
CuSO 4
When E ext < 1.1 V
(i) Electrons flow from Zn rod to
Cu rod hence current flows
from Cu to Zn.
(ii) Zn dissolves at anode and
copper deposits at cathode.
Fig. 3.2
Functioning of Daniell
cell when external
voltage E ext opposing the
cell potential is applied.
I=0
Zn
(c)
CuSO 4
E ext >1.1
e –
Cathode
+ve
Zn
When E ext = 1.1 V
(i) No flow of
electrons or
current.
(ii) No chemical
reaction.
Current
When E ext > 1.1 V
(i) Electrons flow
Anode
from Cu to Zn
–ve
and current flows
Cu
from Zn to Cu.
(ii) Zinc is deposited
at the zinc
electrode and
copper dissolves at
copper electrode.
* Strictly speaking activity should be used instead of concentration. It is directly proportional to concentration. In dilute
solutions, it is equal to concentration. You will study more about it in higher classes.
Chemistry
643.2 Galvanic Cells
As mentioned earlier (Class XI, Unit 8) a galvanic cell is an
electrochemical cell that converts the chemical energy of a spontaneous
redox reaction into electrical energy. In this device the Gibbs energy of
the spontaneous redox reaction is converted into electrical work which
may be used for running a motor or other electrical gadgets like heater,
fan, geyser, etc.
Daniell cell discussed earlier is one such cell in which the following
redox reaction occurs.
Zn(s) + Cu 2+ (aq) → Zn 2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
This reaction is a combination of two half reactions whose addition
gives the overall cell reaction:
(i) Cu 2+ + 2e –
→ Cu(s)
(reduction half reaction)
(3.2)
2+
–
(ii) Zn(s) → Zn + 2e
(oxidation half reaction)
(3.3)
These reactions occur in two different portions of the Daniell cell.
The reduction half reaction occurs on the copper electrode while the
oxidation half reaction occurs on the zinc electrode. These two portions
of the cell are also called half-cells or redox couples. The copper
electrode may be called the reduction half cell and the zinc electrode,
the oxidation half-cell.
We can construct innumerable number of galvanic cells on the pattern
of Daniell cell by taking combinations of different half-cells. Each half-
cell consists of a metallic electrode dipped into an electrolyte. The two
half-cells are connected by a metallic wire through a voltmeter and a
switch externally. The electrolytes of the two half-cells are connected
internally through a salt bridge as shown in Fig. 3.1. Sometimes, both
the electrodes dip in the same electrolyte solution and in such cases we
do not require a salt bridge.
At each electrode-electrolyte interface there is a tendency of metal
ions from the solution to deposit on the metal electrode trying to make
it positively charged. At the same time, metal atoms of the electrode
have a tendency to go into the solution as ions and leave behind the
electrons at the electrode trying to make it negatively charged. At
equilibrium, there is a separation of charges and depending on the
tendencies of the two opposing reactions, the electrode may be positively
or negatively charged with respect to the solution. A potential difference
develops between the electrode and the electrolyte which is called
electrode potential. When the concentrations of all the species involved
in a half-cell is unity then the electrode potential is known as standard
electrode potential. According to IUPAC convention, standard
reduction potentials are now called standard electrode potentials. In a
galvanic cell, the half-cell in which oxidation takes place is called anode
and it has a negative potential with respect to the solution. The other
half-cell in which reduction takes place is called cathode and it has a
positive potential with respect to the solution. Thus, there exists a
potential difference between the two electrodes and as soon as the
switch is in the on position the electrons flow from negative electrode
to positive electrode. The direction of current flow is opposite to that
of electron flow.
65
ElectrochemistryThe potential difference between the two electrodes of a galvanic
cell is called the cell potential and is measured in volts. The cell
potential is the difference between the electrode potentials (reduction
potentials) of the cathode and anode. It is called the cell electromotive
force (emf) of the cell when no current is drawn through the cell. It
is now an accepted convention that we keep the anode on the left and
the cathode on the right while representing the galvanic cell. A galvanic
cell is generally represented by putting a vertical line between metal
and electrolyte solution and putting a double vertical line between
the two electrolytes connected by a salt bridge. Under this convention
the emf of the cell is positive and is given by the potential of the half-
cell on the right hand side minus the potential of the half-cell on the
left hand side i.e.,
E cell = E right – E left
This is illustrated by the following example:
Cell reaction:
Cu(s) + 2Ag + (aq) → Cu 2+ (aq) + 2 Ag(s) (3.4)
Half-cell reactions:
Cathode (reduction): 2Ag + (aq) + 2e – → 2Ag(s)
Anode (oxidation):
Cu(s) → Cu 2+ (aq) + 2e – (3.5)
(3.6)
It can be seen that the sum of (3.5) and (3.6) leads to overall reaction
(3.4) in the cell and that silver electrode acts as a cathode and copper
electrode acts as an anode. The cell can be represented as:
Cu(s)|Cu 2+ (aq)||Ag + (aq)|Ag(s)
and we have E cell = E right – E left = E Ag Ag – E Cu
+
3.2.1
Measurement
of Electrode
Potential
Cu
2+
(3.7)
The potential of individual half-cell cannot be measured. We can
measure only the difference between the two half-cell potentials that
gives the emf of the cell. If we arbitrarily choose the potential of one
electrode (half-cell) then that of the other can be determined with respect
to this. According to convention, a half-cell
called standard hydrogen electrode (Fig.3.3)
represented by Pt(s) H 2 (g) H + (aq), is assigned
a zero potential at all temperatures
corresponding to the reaction
1
H + (aq) + e – →
H (g)
2 2
The standard hydrogen electrode consists
of a platinum electrode coated with platinum
black. The electrode is dipped in an acidic
solution and pure hydrogen gas is bubbled
through it. The concentration of both the
reduced and oxidised forms of hydrogen is
maintained at unity (Fig. 3.3). This implies
that the pressure of hydrogen gas is one bar
and the concentration of hydrogen ion in the
solution is one molar.
Fig. 3.3: Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE).
Chemistry
66At 298 K the emf of the cell, standard hydrogen electrode second
half-cell constructed by taking standard hydrogen electrode as anode
(reference half-cell) and the other half-cell as cathode, gives the reduction
potential of the other half-cell. If the concentrations of the oxidised
and the reduced forms of the species in the right hand half-cell are
unity, then the cell potential is equal to standard electrode potential,
E ⊖ R of the given half-cell.
E ⊖ = E ⊖ R – E ⊖ L
As E ⊖ L for standard hydrogen electrode is zero.
E ⊖ = E ⊖ R – 0 = E ⊖ R
The measured emf of the cell:
+
2+
Pt(s)  H 2 (g, 1 bar)  H (aq, 1 M)  Cu (aq, 1 M)  Cu
is 0.34 V and it is also the value for the standard electrode potential
of the half-cell corresponding to the reaction:
2+
–
Cu (aq, 1M) + 2 e → Cu(s)
Similarly, the measured emf of the cell:
+
2+
Pt(s)  H 2 (g, 1 bar)  H (aq, 1 M)  Zn (aq, 1M)  Zn
is -0.76 V corresponding to the standard electrode potential of the
half-cell reaction:
2+
–
Zn (aq, 1 M) + 2e → Zn(s)
The positive value of the standard electrode potential in the first
2+
+
case indicates that Cu ions get reduced more easily than H ions. The
reverse process cannot occur, that is, hydrogen ions cannot oxidise
Cu (or alternatively we can say that hydrogen gas can reduce copper
ion) under the standard conditions described above. Thus, Cu does
not dissolve in HCl. In nitric acid it is oxidised by nitrate ion and not
by hydrogen ion. The negative value of the standard electrode potential
in the second case indicates that hydrogen ions can oxidise zinc (or
zinc can reduce hydrogen ions).
In view of this convention, the half reaction for the Daniell cell in
Fig. 3.1 can be written as:
2+
–
Left electrode: Zn(s) → Zn (aq, 1 M) + 2 e
2+
–
Right electrode: Cu (aq, 1 M) + 2 e → Cu(s)
The overall reaction of the cell is the sum of above two reactions
and we obtain the equation:
2+
2+
Zn(s) + Cu (aq) → Zn (aq) + Cu(s)
0
emf of the cell = E cell
= E 0R – E 0L
= 0.34V – (– 0.76)V = 1.10 V
Sometimes metals like platinum or gold are used as inert electrodes.
They do not participate in the reaction but provide their surface for
oxidation or reduction reactions and for the conduction of electrons.
For example, Pt is used in the following half-cells:
Hydrogen electrode: Pt(s)|H 2 (g)| H + (aq)
With half-cell reaction: H + (aq)+ e – → 1⁄2 H 2 (g)
Bromine electrode: Pt(s)|Br 2 (aq)| Br – (aq)
67
ElectrochemistryWith half-cell reaction: 1⁄2 Br 2 (aq) + e – → Br – (aq)
The standard electrode potentials are very important and we can
extract a lot of useful information from them. The values of standard
electrode potentials for some selected half-cell reduction reactions are
given in Table 3.1. If the standard electrode potential of an electrode
is greater than zero then its reduced form is more stable compared to
hydrogen gas. Similarly, if the standard electrode potential is negative
then hydrogen gas is more stable than the reduced form of the species.
It can be seen that the standard electrode potential for fluorine is the
highest in the Table indicating that fluorine gas (F 2 ) has the maximum
tendency to get reduced to fluoride ions (F – ) and therefore fluorine
gas is the strongest oxidising agent and fluoride ion is the weakest
reducing agent. Lithium has the lowest electrode potential indicating
that lithium ion is the weakest oxidising agent while lithium metal is
the most powerful reducing agent in an aqueous solution. It may be
seen that as we go from top to bottom in Table 3.1 the standard
electrode potential decreases and with this, decreases the oxidising
power of the species on the left and increases the reducing power of
the species on the right hand side of the reaction. Electrochemical
cells are extensively used for determining the pH of solutions, solubility
product, equilibrium constant and other thermodynamic properties
and for potentiometric titrations.
Intext Questions
3.1 How would you determine the standard electrode potential of the system
Mg 2+ |Mg?
3.2 Can you store copper sulphate solutions in a zinc pot?
3.3 Consult the table of standard electrode potentials and suggest three
substances that can oxidise ferrous ions under suitable conditions.
3 . 3 Nernst
Equation
We have assumed in the previous section that the concentration of all
the species involved in the electrode reaction is unity. This need not be
always true. Nernst showed that for the electrode reaction:
M n+ (aq) + ne – → M(s)
the electrode potential at any concentration measured with respect to
standard hydrogen electrode can be represented by:
E (
V
M n + / M )
= E ( n + ) –
M /M
RT
[M]
ln n+
nF
[M ]
but concentration of solid M is taken as unity and we have
E (
M n + / M )
V
E (
M n + / M )
1
RT
V
= E ( n + ) –
ln n+
M /M
nF
[M ]
(3.8)
has already been defined, R is gas constant (8.314 JK –1 mol –1 ),
F is Faraday constant (96487 C mol –1 ), T is temperature in kelvin and
[M n+ ] is the concentration of the species, M n+ .
Chemistry
68Table 3.1: Standard Electrode Potentials at 298 K
Ions are present as aqueous species and H 2 O as liquid; gases and solids are shown by g and s.
F 2 (g) + 2e –
Co
3+
–
+ e
+
–
H 2 O 2 + 2H + 2e
MnO 4– + 8H + + 5e –
3+
Au
–
+ 3e
Cl 2 (g) + 2e
Cr 2 O 72–
–
+
–
+ 14H + 6e
+
–
O 2 (g) + 4H + 4e
+
–
MnO 2 (s) + 4H + 2e
–
Br 2 + 2e
NO 3– + 4H + + 3e –
2+
2Hg
–
+ 2e
+
–
Ag + e
3+
–
Fe
+ e
+
–
O 2 (g) + 2H + 2e
–
I 2 + 2e
+
–
Cu + e
Cu 2+ + 2e –
–
AgCl(s) + e
–
AgBr(s) + e
+ –
2+ –
2H + 2e
Pb
+ 2e
2+
–
Sn
+ 2e
Ni 2+ + 2e –
2+
–
Fe
+ 2e
3+
Cr
Zn
+ 3e
2+
–
–
+ 2e
2H 2 O + 2e
3+
Al
+ 3e
2+
Mg
–
2.87
1.81
1.78
1.51
1.40
1.36
1.33
1.23
1.23
1.09
0.97
0.92
0.80
0.77
0.68
0.54
0.52
0.34
0.22
0.10
0.00
–0.13
–0.14
–0.25
–0.44
–0.74
–0.76
–
→ H 2 (g) + 2OH (aq)
→
–0.83
Al(s)
–1.66
→ Mg(s) –2.36
→ Na(s)
→ Ca(s)
→ K(s)
→ Li(s) –2.71
–
+ 2e
K + + e –
+
→ 2F –
→ Co 2+
→ 2H 2 O
→ Mn 2+ + 4H 2 O
→ Au(s)
→ 2Cl –
→ 2Cr 3+ + 7H 2 O
→ 2H 2 O
→ Mn 2+ + 2H 2 O
→ 2Br –
→ NO(g) + 2H 2 O
→ Hg 22+
→ Ag(s)
→ Fe 2+
→ H 2 O 2
→ 2I –
→ Cu(s)
→ Cu(s)
→ Ag(s) + Cl –
→ Ag(s) + Br –
→ H 2 (g)
→ Pb(s)
→ Sn(s)
→ Ni(s)
→ Fe(s)
→ Cr(s)
→ Zn(s) –
Na + e
Ca
E ⊖ /V
+ 2e
–
+
2+
–
→ Reduced form)
of
Reaction (Oxidised form + ne –
–
Li + e
–2.87
–2.93
–3.05
1. A negative E ⊖ means that the redox couple is a stronger reducing agent than the H + /H 2 couple.
2. A positive E ⊖ means that the redox couple is a weaker reducing agent than the H + /H 2 couple.
69
ElectrochemistryIn Daniell cell, the electrode potential for any given concentration of
Cu and Zn 2+ ions, we write
2+
For Cathode:
E (
Cu 2 + / Cu )
V
1
RT
= E ( Cu 2 + / Cu ) –
ln
2 +
2 F
  Cu ( aq )  
(3.9)
For Anode:
E (
Zn 2 + / Zn )
V
1
RT
= E ( Zn 2 + / Zn ) –
ln
2 +
2 F
  Zn ( aq )  
(3.10)
The cell potential, E (cell) = E ( Cu 2 + / Cu ) – E ( Zn 2 + / Zn )
V
= E (
= E (
–
Cu 2 + / Cu )
V
RT
2 F
ln
V
1
RT
1
– E ( Zn 2 + / Zn ) +
ln
2+
2
F
  Zn (aq)  
  Cu (aq)  
V
Cu 2 + / Cu )
2+
– E ( Zn 2 + / Zn ) –
V
RT
RT
2 F
ln
1
  Cu
2+
( aq )  
– ln
1
  Zn
2+
( aq )  
[ Zn 2 + ]
E (cell) = E ( cell ) –
ln
2 F
[ Cu 2 + ]
(3.11)
It can be seen that E (cell) depends on the concentration of both Cu 2+
and Zn 2+ ions. It increases with increase in the concentration of Cu 2+
ions and decrease in the concentration of Zn 2+ ions.
By converting the natural logarithm in Eq. (3.11) to the base 10 and
substituting the values of R, F and T = 298 K, it reduces to
V
E (cell) = E ( cell ) –
0 . 059
[ Zn 2 + ]
log
2
[ Cu 2 + ]
(3.12)
We should use the same number of electrons (n) for both the
electrodes and thus for the following cell
Ni(s) Ni 2+ (aq)  Ag + (aq) Ag
The cell reaction is Ni(s) + 2Ag + (aq) →Ni 2+ (aq) + 2Ag(s)
The Nernst equation can be written as
V
RT
ln
E (cell) = E ( cell ) –
2 F
[Ni 2+ ]
[Ag + ] 2
and for a general electrochemical reaction of the type:
ne
a A + bB   → cC + dD
Nernst equation can be written as:
V RT
V RT
E (cell) = E ( cell ) – nF 1nQ
[C] c [D] d
= E ( cell ) – nF ln a b
[A] [B]
Chemistry
70
(3.13)Represent the cell in which the following reaction takes place
Mg(s) + 2Ag + (0.0001M) → Mg 2+ (0.130M) + 2Ag(s)
Example 3.1
V
Calculate its E (cell) if E ( cell ) = 3.17 V.
The cell can be written as Mg Mg 2+ (0.130M) Ag + (0.0001M) Ag
V
E ( cell ) = E ( cell ) –
Solution
 Mg 2 +  
RT
ln 
2
2F
  Ag +  
= 3.17 V –
3.3.1 Equilibrium
Constant
from Nernst
Equation
0 . 059 V
0.130
log
= 3.17 V – 0.21V = 2.96 V.
2
( 0 . 0001 ) 2
If the circuit in Daniell cell (Fig. 3.1) is closed then we note that the reaction
Zn(s) + Cu 2+ (aq) → Zn 2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
(3.1)
takes place and as time passes, the concentration of Zn 2+ keeps
on increasing while the concentration of Cu 2+ keeps on decreasing.
At the same time voltage of the cell as read on the voltmeter keeps
on decreasing. After some time, we shall note that there is no change
in the concentration of Cu 2+ and Zn 2+ ions and at the same time,
voltmeter gives zero reading. This indicates that equilibrium has been
attained. In this situation the Nernst equation may be written as:
V
E (cell) = 0 = E ( cell ) –
2.303 RT
[Zn 2 + ]
log
2 F
[Cu 2 + ]
2.303 RT
[Zn 2 + ]
log
2 F
[Cu 2 + ]
But at equilibrium,
V
or E ( cell ) =
[ Zn 2 + ]
[ Cu 2 + ]
= K c for the reaction 3.1
and at T = 298K the above equation can be written as
V
E ( cell ) =
0 . 059 V
log K C = 1.1 V
2
log K C =
V
( E ( cell ) = 1.1V)
(1.1V × 2)
= 37.288
0.059 V
K C = 2 × 10 37 at 298K.
In general,
V
E ( cell ) =
2.303RT
log K C
nF
(3.14)
Thus, Eq. (3.14) gives a relationship between equilibrium constant
of the reaction and standard potential of the cell in which that reaction
takes place. Thus, equilibrium constants of the reaction, difficult to
measure otherwise, can be calculated from the corresponding E ⊖ value
of the cell.
71
ElectrochemistryExample 3.2 Calculate the equilibrium constant of the reaction:
Cu(s) + 2Ag + (aq) → Cu 2+ (aq) + 2Ag(s)
V
E ( cell ) = 0.46 V
Solution
V
E ( cell )
log K C
0 . 059 V
log K C = 0.46 V or
2
0 . 46 V × 2
= 0 . 059 V = 15.6
=
K C = 3.92 × 10 15
3.3.2 Electro-
chemical
Cell and
Gibbs
Energy of
the Reaction
Electrical work done in one second is equal to electrical potential
multiplied by total charge passed. If we want to obtain maximum work
from a galvanic cell then charge has to be passed reversibly. The
reversible work done by a galvanic cell is equal to decrease in its Gibbs
energy and therefore, if the emf of the cell is E and nF is the amount
of charge passed and ∆ r G is the Gibbs energy of the reaction, then
∆ r G = – nFE (cell)
(3.15)
It may be remembered that E (cell) is an intensive parameter but ∆ r G
is an extensive thermodynamic property and the value depends on n.
Thus, if we write the reaction
Zn(s) + Cu 2+ (aq) → Zn 2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
(3.1)
∆ r G = – 2FE (cell)
but when we write the reaction
2 Zn (s) + 2 Cu 2+ (aq) →2 Zn 2+ (aq) + 2Cu(s)
∆ r G = – 4FE (cell)
If the concentration of all the reacting species is unity, then
V
E (cell) = E ( cell ) and we have
V
∆ r G ⊖ = – nF E (cell)
(3.16)
V
( cell )
Thus, from the measurement of E
we can obtain an important
⊖
thermodynamic quantity, ∆ r G , standard Gibbs energy of the reaction.
From the latter we can calculate equilibrium constant by the equation:
∆ r G ⊖ = –RT ln K.
Example 3.3 The standard electrode potential for Daniell cell is 1.1V. Calculate
the standard Gibbs energy for the reaction:
Zn(s) + Cu 2+ (aq) → Zn 2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
V
Solution ∆ r G ⊖ = – nF E (cell)
V
n in the above equation is 2, F = 96487 C mol –1 and E ( cell ) = 1.1 V
Therefore, ∆ r G ⊖ = – 2 × 1.1V × 96487 C mol –1
= – 21227 J mol –1
= – 212.27 kJ mol –1
Chemistry
72Intext Questions
3.4 Calculate the potential of hydrogen electrode in contact with a solution
whose pH is 10.
3.5 Calculate the emf of the cell in which the following reaction takes place:
Ni(s) + 2Ag + (0.002 M) → Ni 2+ (0.160 M) + 2Ag(s)
Given that
E V (cell) = 1.05 V
3.6 The cell in which the following reaction occurs:
2Fe 3 + ( aq ) + 2I − ( aq ) → 2Fe 2 + ( aq ) + I 2 ( s ) has E cell = 0.236 V at 298 K.
Calculate the standard Gibbs energy and the equilibrium constant of the
cell reaction.
0
3 . 4 Conductance
of Electrolytic
Solutions
It is necessary to define a few terms before we consider the subject of
conductance of electricity through electrolytic solutions. The electrical
resistance is represented by the symbol ‘R’ and it is measured in ohm (Ω)
which in terms of SI base units is equal to (kg m 2 )/(S 3 A 2 ). It can be
measured with the help of a Wheatstone bridge with which you are familiar
from your study of physics. The electrical resistance of any object is
directly proportional to its length, l, and inversely proportional to its area
of cross section, A. That is,
l
l
or R = ρ
(3.17)
A
A
The constant of proportionality, ρ (Greek, rho), is called resistivity
(specific resistance). Its SI units are ohm metre (Ω m) and quite often
its submultiple, ohm centimetre (Ω cm) is also used. IUPAC recommends
the use of the term resistivity over specific resistance and hence in the
rest of the book we shall use the term resistivity. Physically, the resistivity
for a substance is its resistance when it is one metre long and its area
of cross section is one m 2 . It can be seen that:
R ∝
1 Ω m = 100 Ω cm or 1 Ω cm = 0.01 Ω m
The inverse of resistance, R, is called conductance, G, and we have
the relation:
1
A
A
=
(3.18)
= κ
R
ρ l
l
The SI unit of conductance is siemens, represented by the symbol
‘S’ and is equal to ohm –1 (also known as mho) or Ω –1 . The inverse of
resistivity, called conductivity (specific conductance) is represented by
the symbol, κ (Greek, kappa). IUPAC has recommended the use of term
conductivity over specific conductance and hence we shall use the term
conductivity in the rest of the book. The SI units of conductivity are
S m –1 but quite often, κ is expressed in S cm –1 . Conductivity of a
material in S m –1 is its conductance when it is 1 m long and its area
of cross section is 1 m 2 . It may be noted that 1 S cm –1 = 100 S m –1 .
G =
73
ElectrochemistryTable 3.2: The values of Conductivity of some Selected
Materials at 298.15 K
Material
Conductors
Sodium
Copper
Silver
Gold
Iron
Graphite
Insulators
Glass
Teflon
Conductivity/
S m –1
2.1×10 3
5.9×10 3
6.2×10 3
4.5×10 3
1.0×10 3
1.2×10
1.0×10 –16
1.0×10 –18
Material
Aqueous Solutions
Pure water
0.1 M HCl
0.01M KCl
0.01M NaCl
0.1 M HAc
0.01M HAc
Semiconductors
CuO
Si
Ge
Conductivity/
S m –1
3.5×10 –5
3.91
0.14
0.12
0.047
0.016
1×10 –7
1.5×10 –2
2.0
It can be seen from Table 3.2 that the magnitude of conductivity
varies a great deal and depends on the nature of the material. It also
depends on the temperature and pressure at which the measurements
are made. Materials are classified into conductors, insulators and
semiconductors depending on the magnitude of their conductivity. Metals
and their alloys have very large conductivity and are known as conductors.
Certain non-metals like carbon-black, graphite and some organic
polymers * are also electronically conducting. Substances like glass,
ceramics, etc., having very low conductivity are known as insulators.
Substances like silicon, doped silicon and gallium arsenide having
conductivity between conductors and insulators are called
semiconductors and are important electronic materials. Certain materials
called superconductors by definition have zero resistivity or infinite
conductivity. Earlier, only metals and their alloys at very low temperatures
(0 to 15 K) were known to behave as superconductors, but nowadays a
number of ceramic materials and mixed oxides are also known to show
superconductivity at temperatures as high as 150 K.
Electrical conductance through metals is called metallic or electronic
conductance and is due to the movement of electrons. The electronic
conductance depends on
(i) the nature and structure of the metal
(ii) the number of valence electrons per atom
(iii) temperature (it decreases with increase of temperature).
*
Electronically conducting polymers – In 1977 MacDiarmid, Heeger and Shirakawa discovered that acetylene gas can
be polymerised to produce a polymer, polyacetylene when exposed to vapours of iodine acquires metallic lustre and
conductivity. Since then several organic conducting polymers have been made such as polyaniline, polypyrrole and
polythiophene. These organic metals, being composed wholly of elements like carbon, hydrogen and occasionally
nitrogen, oxygen or sulphur, are much lighter than normal metals and can be used for making light-weight batteries.
Besides, they have the mechanical properties of polymers such as flexibility so that one can make electronic devices
such as transistors that can bend like a sheet of plastic. For the discovery of conducting polymers, MacDiarmid,
Heeger and Shirakawa were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the year 2000.
Chemistry
74As the electrons enter at one end and go out through the other end,
the composition of the metallic conductor remains unchanged. The
mechanism of conductance through semiconductors is more complex.
We already know (Class XI, Unit 7) that even very pure water has
small amounts of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions (~10 –7 M) which lend it
very low conductivity (3.5 × 10 –5 S m –1 ). When electrolytes are dissolved
in water, they furnish their own ions in the solution hence its conductivity
also increases. The conductance of electricity by ions present in the
solutions is called electrolytic or ionic conductance. The conductivity of
electrolytic (ionic) solutions depends on:
(i) the nature of the electrolyte added
(ii) size of the ions produced and their solvation
(iii) the nature of the solvent and its viscosity
(iv) concentration of the electrolyte
(v) temperature (it increases with the increase of temperature).
Passage of direct current through ionic solution over a prolonged
period can lead to change in its composition due to electrochemical
reactions (Section 3.4.1).
3.4.1 Measurement
of the
Conductivity
of Ionic
Solutions
We know that accurate measurement of an unknown resistance can be
performed on a Wheatstone bridge. However, for measuring the resistance
of an ionic solution we face two problems. Firstly, passing direct current
(DC) changes the composition of the solution. Secondly, a solution cannot
be connected to the bridge like a metallic wire or other solid conductor.
The first difficulty is resolved by using an alternating current (AC) source
of power. The second problem is solved by using a specially designed
vessel called conductivity cell. It is available in several designs and two
simple ones are shown in Fig. 3.4.
Connecting
wires
Connecting
wires
Fig. 3.4
Two different types of
conductivity cells.
Platinized Pt
electrodes
Platinized Pt electrode
Platinized Pt electrode
Basically it consists of two platinum electrodes coated with platinum
black (finely divided metallic Pt is deposited on the electrodes
electrochemically). These have area of cross section equal to ‘A’ and are
separated by distance ‘l’. Therefore, solution confined between these
electrodes is a column of length l and area of cross section A. The
resistance of such a column of solution is then given by the equation:
R = ρ
l
l
=
A κ A
(3.17)
75
ElectrochemistryThe quantity l/A is called cell constant denoted by the symbol, G*.
It depends on the distance between the electrodes and their area of
cross-section and has the dimension of length –1 and can be calculated
if we know l and A. Measurement of l and A is not only inconvenient
but also unreliable. The cell constant is usually determined by measuring
the resistance of the cell containing a solution whose conductivity is
already known. For this purpose, we generally use KCl solutions whose
conductivity is known accurately at various concentrations (Table 3.3)
and at different temperatures. The cell constant, G*, is then given by
the equation:
G* =
l
= R κ
A
(3.18)
Table 3.3: Conductivity and Molar conductivity of KCl solutions
at 298.15K
Concentration/Molarity
Conductivity
Molar Conductivity
mol L –1 mol m –3 S cm –1 S m –1 S cm 2 mol –1 S m 2 mol –1
1.000 1000 0.1113 11.13 111.3 111.3×10 –4
0.100 100.0 0.0129 1.29 129.0 129.0×10 –4
0.010 10.00 0.00141 0.141 141.0 141.0×10 –4
Once the cell constant is determined, we can use
it for measuring the resistance or conductivity of
any solution. The set up for the measurement of the
resistance is shown in Fig. 3.5.
It consists of two resistances R 3 and R 4 , a variable
resistance R 1 and the conductivity cell having the
unknown resistance R 2 . The Wheatstone bridge is
fed by an oscillator O (a source of a.c. power in the
audio frequency range 550 to 5000 cycles per
second). P is a suitable detector (a headphone or
other electronic device) and the bridge is balanced
when no current passes through the detector. Under
these conditions:
Fig. 3.5: Arrangement for measurement
of resistance of a solution of an
electrolyte.
R 1 R 4
(3.19)
R 3
These days, inexpensive conductivity meters are
available which can directly read the conductance or resistance of the
solution in the conductivity cell. Once the cell constant and the resistance
of the solution in the cell is determined, the conductivity of the solution
is given by the equation:
Unknown resistance R 2 =
cell constant G*
=
(3.20)
R
R
The conductivity of solutions of different electrolytes in the same
solvent and at a given temperature differs due to charge and size of the
κ =
Chemistry
76ions in which they dissociate, the concentration of ions or ease with
which the ions move under a potential gradient. It, therefore, becomes
necessary to define a physically more meaningful quantity called molar
conductivity denoted by the symbol Λ m (Greek, lambda). It is related
to the conductivity of the solution by the equation:
Molar conductivity = Λ m =
κ
(3.21)
c
In the above equation, if κ is expressed in S m and the concentration,
c in mol m –3 then the units of Λ m are in S m 2 mol –1 . It may be noted that:
1 mol m –3 = 1000(L/m 3 ) × molarity (mol/L), and hence
Λ m (S cm mol ) =
2
–1
–1
κ (S cm − 1 )
1000 L m − 3 × molarity (mol L − 1 )
If we use S cm –1 as the units for κ and mol cm –3 , the units of
concentration, then the units for Λ m are S cm 2 mol –1 . It can be calculated
by using the equation:
Λ m (S cm mol ) =
2
Both
other by
1
1
–1
κ (S cm − 1 ) × 1000 (cm 3 / L)
molarity (mol / L)
type of units are used in literature and are related to each
the equations:
S m 2 mol –1 = 10 4 S cm 2 mol –1 or
S cm 2 mol –1 = 10 –4 S m 2 mol –1 .
Resistance of a conductivity cell filled with 0.1 mol L –1 KCl solution is
100 Ω. If the resistance of the same cell when filled with 0.02 mol L –1
KCl solution is 520 Ω, calculate the conductivity and molar conductivity
of 0.02 mol L –1 KCl solution. The conductivity of 0.1 mol L –1 KCl
solution is 1.29 S/m.
Example 3.4
The cell constant is given by the equation:
Cell constant = G* = conductivity × resistance
= 1.29 S/m × 100 Ω = 129 m –1 = 1.29 cm –1
Conductivity of 0.02 mol L –1 KCl solution = cell constant / resistance
=
Concentration
Solution
G *
129 m –1
=
= 0.248 S m –1
R
520 Ω
= 0.02 mol L –1
= 1000 × 0.02 mol m –3 = 20 mol m –3
Molar conductivity = Λ m =
κ
c
248 × 10 –3 S m –1
=
= 124 × 10 –4 S m 2 mol –1
20 mol m –3
Alternatively,
κ =
1.29 cm –1
= 0.248 × 10 –2 S cm –1
520 Ω
77
ElectrochemistryΛ m = κ × 1000 cm 3 L –1 molarity –1
and
=
0.248×10 –2 S cm –1 ×1000 cm 3 L –1
0.02 mol L –1
= 124 S cm 2 mol –1
Example 3.5 The electrical resistance of a column of 0.05 mol L –1 NaOH solution of
diameter 1 cm and length 50 cm is 5.55 × 10 3 ohm. Calculate its
resistivity, conductivity and molar conductivity.
Solution A = π r 2 = 3.14 × 0.5 2 cm 2 = 0.785 cm 2 = 0.785 × 10 –4 m 2
l = 50 cm = 0.5 m
R =
ρ l
A
or
ρ =
Conductivity = κ =
RA
5.55 × 10 3 Ω × 0.785 cm 2
=
= 87.135 Ω cm
l
50 cm
1


 S cm –1
= 
87.135

ρ 
1
= 0.01148 S cm –1
Molar conductivity , Λ m =
=
κ × 1000
c
cm 3 L –1
0.01148 S cm –1 ×1000 cm 3 L –1
0.05 mol L –1
= 229.6 S cm 2 mol –1
If we want to calculate the values of different quantities in terms of ‘m’
instead of ‘cm’,
ρ = RA
l
κ =
1
ρ
= 5.55 × 10 3 Ω × 0.785×10 –4 m 2
= 87.135 ×10 –2 Ω m
0.5 m
= 100
Ω m = 1.148 S m –1
87.135
and
3.4.2 Variation of
Conductivity
and Molar
Conductivity
with
Concentration
Chemistry
78
Λ m =
κ
c
=
1.148 S m –1
50 mol m –3
= 229.6 × 10 –4 S m 2 mol –1 .
Both conductivity and molar conductivity change with the
concentration of the electrolyte. Conductivity always decreases with
decrease in concentration both, for weak and strong electrolytes.
This can be explained by the fact that the number of ions per unit
volume that carry the current in a solution decreases on dilution.
The conductivity of a solution at any given concentration is the
conductance of one unit volume of solution kept between twoplatinum electrodes with unit area of cross section and at a distance
of unit length. This is clear from the equation:
κ A = κ
G =
(both A and l are unity in their appropriate units in
l
m or cm)
Molar conductivity of a solution at a given concentration is the
conductance of the volume V of solution containing one mole of
electrolyte kept between two electrodes with area of cross section A and
distance of unit length. Therefore,
κ A
Λ m =
= κ
l
Since l = 1 and A = V ( volume containing 1 mole of electrolyte)
Λ m = κ V
(3.22)
Fig. 3.6: Molar conductivity versus c1⁄2 for acetic
acid (weak electrolyte) and potassium
chloride (strong electrolyte) in aqueous
solutions.
Molar conductivity increases with
decrease in concentration. This is
because the total volume, V, of solution
containing one mole of electrolyte also
increases. It has been found that decrease
in κ on dilution of a solution is more
than compensated by increase in its
volume. Physically, it means that at a
given concentration, Λ m can be defined
as the conductance of the electrolytic
solution kept between the electrodes of a
conductivity cell at unit distance but
having area of cross section large enough
to accommodate sufficient volume of
solution that contains one mole of the
electrolyte. When concentration
approaches zero, the molar conductivity
is known as limiting molar
conductivity and is represented by the
symbol Λ ° m . The variation in Λ m with
concentration is different (Fig. 3.6) for
strong and weak electrolytes.
Strong Electrolytes
For strong electrolytes, Λ m increases slowly with dilution and can be
represented by the equation:
Λ m = Λ m ° – A c 1⁄2
(3.23)
It can be seen that if we plot (Fig. 3.12) Λ m against
c 1/2 , we obtain a straight line with intercept equal to Λ m ° and slope equal
to ‘–A’. The value of the constant ‘A’ for a given solvent and temperature
depends on the type of electrolyte i.e., the charges on the cation and
anion produced on the dissociation of the electrolyte in the solution.
Thus, NaCl, CaCl 2 , MgSO 4 are known as 1-1, 2-1 and 2-2 electrolytes
respectively. All electrolytes of a particular type have the same value
for ‘A’.
79
ElectrochemistryExample 3.6 The molar conductivity of KCl solutions at different concentrations at
298 K are given below:
c/mol L –1
0.000198
0.000309
0.000521
0.000989
Λ m /S cm 2 mol –1
148.61
148.29
147.81
147.09
Show that a plot between Λ m and c 1/2 is a straight line. Determine the
values of Λ m ° and A for KCl.
Solution Taking the square root of concentration we obtain:
c 1/2 /(mol L –1 ) 1/2
0.01407
0.01758
0.02283
0.03145
Λ m /S cm 2 mol –1
148.61
148.29
147.81
147.09
A plot of Λ m ( y-axis) and c 1/2 (x-axis) is shown in (Fig. 3.7).
It can be seen that it is nearly a straight line. From the intercept
(c 1/2 = 0), we find that
Λ m ° = 150.0 S cm 2 mol –1 and
A = – slope = 87.46 S cm 2 mol –1 /(mol/L –1 ) 1/2 .
Fig. 3.7: Variation of Λ m against c1⁄2.
Chemistry
80Kohlrausch examined Λ m ° values for a number of strong electrolytes
and observed certain regularities. He noted that the difference in Λ m ° of
the electrolytes NaX and KX for any X is nearly constant. For example
at 298 K:
– Λ °
= Λ °
– Λ °
Λ °
m (KCl)
= Λ m °
m (NaCl)
– Λ m °
(KI)
(NaI)
m (KBr)
m (NaBr)
≃ 23.4 S cm 2 mol –1
and similarly it was found that
Λ m ° (NaBr) – Λ m ° (NaCl) = Λ m ° (KBr) – Λ m °
(KCl)
≃ 1.8 S cm 2 mol –1
On the basis of the above observations he enunciated Kohlrausch
law of independent migration of ions. The law states that limiting
molar conductivity of an electrolyte can be represented as the sum of
the individual contributions of the anion and cation of the electrolyte.
Thus, if λ ° Na+ and λ ° Cl– are limiting molar conductivity of the sodium and
chloride ions respectively, then the limiting molar conductivity for sodium
chloride is given by the equation:
Λ m ° (NaCl) = λ 0Na+ + λ 0Cl–
(3.24)
In general, if an electrolyte on dissociation gives ν + cations and ν –
anions then its limiting molar conductivity is given by:
Λ m ° = ν + λ 0+ + ν – λ 0–
(3.25)
Here, λ 0 + and λ 0 − are the limiting molar conductivities of the cation
and anion respectively. The values of λ 0 for some cations and anions at
298 K are given in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Limiting Molar Conductivity for some
Ions in Water at 298 K
Ion λ 0 /(S cm 2 mol –1 ) Ion λ 0 /(S cm 2 mol –1 )
H + 349.6 OH – 199.1
Na
+
K +
Ca
2+
Mg
2+
–
50.1 Cl
73.5 Br –
119.0 CH 3 COO
106.0 2−
SO 4
76.3
78.1
–
40.9
160.0
Weak Electrolytes
Weak electrolytes like acetic acid have lower degree of dissociation at
higher concentrations and hence for such electrolytes, the change in Λ m
with dilution is due to increase in the degree of dissociation and
consequently the number of ions in total volume of solution that contains
1 mol of electrolyte. In such cases Λ m increases steeply (Fig. 3.12) on
dilution, especially near lower concentrations. Therefore, Λ m ° cannot be
obtained by extrapolation of Λ m to zero concentration. At infinite dilution
(i.e., concentration c → zero) electrolyte dissociates completely (α =1),
but at such low concentration the conductivity of the solution is so low
that it cannot be measured accurately. Therefore, Λ m ° for weak electrolytes
is obtained by using Kohlrausch law of independent migration of ions
(Example 3.8). At any concentration c, if α is the degree of dissociation
81
Electrochemistrythen it can be approximated to the ratio of molar conductivity Λ m at the
concentration c to limiting molar conductivity, Λ m ° . Thus we have:
α =
Λ m
Λ m °
(3.26)
But we know that for a weak electrolyte like acetic acid (Class XI,
Unit 7),
c Λ m 2
c Λ 2
c α 2
=
= ο ο m
K =
a ( 1 − α )
2 
Λ  Λ m ( Λ m − Λ m )
(3.27)
Λ m ο  1 − m ο 
Λ m 

Applications of Kohlrausch law
Using Kohlrausch law of independent migration of ions, it is possible to
calculate Λ m ° for any electrolyte from the λ o of individual ions. Moreover,
for weak electrolytes like acetic acid it is possible to determine the value
of its dissociation constant once we know the Λ m ° and Λ m at a given
concentration c.
Example 3.7 Calculate Λ m ° for CaCl 2 and MgSO 4 from the data given in Table 3.4.
Solution We know from Kohlrausch law that
Λ m ο ( CaCl
2
)
ο
ο
= λ Ca 2+ + 2 λ Cl – = 119.0 S cm 2 mol –1 + 2(76.3) S cm 2 mol –1
= (119.0 + 152.6) S cm 2 mol –1
= 271.6 S cm 2 mol –1
Λ m ο ( MgSO ) = λ ο Mg + λ ο SO = 106.0 S cm 2 mol –1 + 160.0 S cm 2 mol –1
2+
4
2–
4
= 266 S cm 2 mol –1 .
Example 3.8 Λ m ° for NaCl, HCl and NaAc are 126.4, 425.9 and 91.0 S cm 2 mol –1
respectively. Calculate Λ o for HAc.
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
= λ H + + λ Ac – = λ H + + λ Cl – + λ Ac – + λ Na + − λ Cl – − λ Na +
Solution Λ m ο ( HAc )
= Λ m ο ( HCl ) + Λ m ο ( NaAc ) − Λ m ο ( NaCl )
= (425.9 + 91.0 – 126.4 ) S cm 2 mol –1
= 390.5 S cm 2 mol –1 .
Example 3.9 The conductivity of 0.001028 mol L –1 acetic acid is 4.95 × 10 –5 S cm –1 .
Calculate its dissociation constant if Λ m ° for acetic acid is
390.5 S cm 2 mol –1 .
κ
Solution Λ m = c
Chemistry
82
=
4 . 95 × 10 − 5 S cm − 1 1000 cm 3
×
= 48.15 S cm 3 mol –1
0 . 001028 mol L − 1
L
α Λ m 48.15 S cm 2 mol − 1
= Λ ο = 390.5 S cm 2 mol − 1 = 0.1233
m
k =
c α 2
0 . 001028 mol L –1 × ( 0 . 1233 ) 2 = 1.78 × 10 –5 mol L –1
=
1 − 0 . 1233
( 1 − α )Intext Questions
3.7 Why does the conductivity of a solution decrease with dilution?
3.8 Suggest a way to determine the Λ ° value of water.
m
3.9 The molar conductivity of 0.025 mol L –1 methanoic acid is 46.1 S cm 2 mol –1 .
Calculate its degree of dissociation and dissociation constant. Given λ 0 (H + )
= 349.6 S cm 2 mol –1 and λ 0 (HCOO – ) = 54.6 S cm 2 mol –1 .
3 . 5 Electrolytic
Cells and
Electrolysis
In an electrolytic cell external source of voltage is used to bring about
a chemical reaction. The electrochemical processes are of great importance
in the laboratory and the chemical industry. One of the simplest electrolytic
cell consists of two copper strips dipping in an aqueous solution of
copper sulphate. If a DC voltage is applied to the two electrodes, then
Cu 2+ ions discharge at the cathode (negatively charged) and the following
reaction takes place:
Cu 2+ (aq) + 2e – → Cu (s)
(3.28)
Copper metal is deposited on the cathode. At the anode, copper is
converted into Cu 2+ ions by the reaction:
Cu(s) → Cu 2+ (s) + 2e –
(3.29)
Thus copper is dissolved (oxidised) at anode and deposited
(reduced) at cathode. This is the basis for an industrial process in
which impure copper is converted into copper of high purity. The
impure copper is made an anode that dissolves on passing current
and pure copper is deposited at the cathode. Many metals like Na, Mg,
Al, etc. are produced on large scale by electrochemical reduction of
their respective cations where no suitable chemical reducing agents
are available for this purpose.
Sodium and magnesium metals are produced by the electrolysis of
their fused chlorides and aluminium is produced (Class XII, Unit 6) by
electrolysis of aluminium oxide in presence of cryolite.
Quantitative Aspects of Electrolysis
Michael Faraday was the first scientist who described the quantitative
aspects of electrolysis. Now Faraday’s laws also flow from what has
been discussed earlier.
Faraday’s Laws of Electrolysis
After his extensive investigations on electrolysis of solutions and melts
of electrolytes, Faraday published his results during 1833-34 in the
form of the following well known Faraday’s two laws of electrolysis:
(i) First Law: The amount of chemical reaction which occurs at any
electrode during electrolysis by a current is proportional to the
quantity of electricity passed through the electrolyte (solution or
melt).
(ii) Second Law: The amounts of different substances liberated by the
same quantity of electricity passing through the electrolytic solution
are proportional to their chemical equivalent weights (Atomic Mass
of Metal ÷ Number of electrons required to reduce the cation).
83
ElectrochemistryThere were no constant current sources available during Faraday’s
times. The general practice was to put a coulometer (a standard electrolytic
cell) for determining the quantity of electricity passed from the amount
of metal (generally silver or copper) deposited or consumed. However,
coulometers are now obsolete and we now have constant current (I)
sources available and the quantity of electricity Q, passed is given by
Q = It
Q is in coloumbs when I is in ampere and t is in second.
The amount of electricity (or charge) required for oxidation or
reduction depends on the stoichiometry of the electrode reaction. For
example, in the reaction:
Ag + (aq) + e – → Ag(s)
(3.30)
One mole of the electron is required for the reduction of one mole
of silver ions.
We know that charge on one electron is equal to 1.6021× 10 –19 C.
Therefore, the charge on one mole of electrons is equal to:
N A × 1.6021 × 10 –19 C = 6.02 × 10 23 mol –1 × 1.6021 × 10 –19
C = 96487 C mol –1
This quantity of electricity is called Faraday and is represented by
the symbol F.
For approximate calculations we use 1F ≃ 96500 C mol –1 .
For the electrode reactions:
Mg 2+ (l) + 2e – → Mg(s)
(3.31)
Al 3+ (l) + 3e – → Al(s)
(3.32)
2+
3+
It is obvious that one mole of Mg and Al
require 2 mol of
electrons (2F) and 3 mol of electrons (3F) respectively. The charge passed
through the electrolytic cell during electrolysis is equal to the product
of current in amperes and time in seconds. In commercial production
of metals, current as high as 50,000 amperes are used that amounts
to about 0.518 F per second.
Example 3.10 A solution of CuSO 4 is electrolysed for 10 minutes with a current of
1.5 amperes. What is the mass of copper deposited at the cathode?
Solution t = 600 s charge = current × time = 1.5 A × 600 s = 900 C
According to the reaction:
Cu 2+ (aq) + 2e – = Cu(s)
We require 2F or 2 × 96487 C to deposit 1 mol or 63 g of Cu.
For 900 C, the mass of Cu deposited
= (63 g mol –1 × 900 C)/(2 × 96487 C mol –1 ) = 0.2938 g.
3.5.1 Products of
Electrolysis
Chemistry
84
Products of electrolysis depend on the nature of material being
electrolysed and the type of electrodes being used. If the electrode is
inert (e.g., platinum or gold), it does not participate in the chemical
reaction and acts only as source or sink for electrons. On the other
hand, if the electrode is reactive, it participates in the electrode reaction.
Thus, the products of electrolysis may be different for reactive and inertelectrodes.The products of electrolysis depend on the different oxidising
and reducing species present in the electrolytic cell and their standard
electrode potentials. Moreover, some of the electrochemical processes
although feasible, are so slow kinetically that at lower voltages these do
not seem to take place and extra potential (called overpotential) has to
be applied, which makes such process more difficult to occur.
For example, if we use molten NaCl, the products of electrolysis are
sodium metal and Cl 2 gas. Here we have only one cation (Na + ) which is
reduced at the cathode (Na + + e – → Na) and one anion (Cl – ) which is
oxidised at the anode (Cl – → 1⁄2Cl 2 + e – ) . During the electrolysis of aqueous
sodium chloride solution, the products are NaOH, Cl 2 and H 2 . In this
case besides Na + and Cl – ions we also have H + and OH – ions along with
the solvent molecules, H 2 O.
At the cathode there is competition between the following reduction
reactions:
V
Na + (aq) + e – → Na (s) E ( cell ) = – 2.71 V
H + (aq) + e – → 1⁄2 H 2 (g) E ( cell ) = 0.00 V
V
The reaction with higher value of E ⊖ is preferred and therefore, the
reaction at the cathode during electrolysis is:
H + (aq) + e – → 1⁄2 H 2 (g)
(3.33)
but H + (aq) is produced by the dissociation of H 2 O, i.e.,
H 2 O (l ) → H + (aq) + OH – (aq)
(3.34)
Therefore, the net reaction at the cathode may be written as the sum
of (3.33) and (3.34) and we have
H 2 O (l ) + e – → 1⁄2H 2 (g) + OH –
(3.35)
At the anode the following oxidation reactions are possible:
V (3.36)
V (3.37)
Cl – (aq) → 1⁄2 Cl 2 (g) + e – E ( cell ) = 1.36 V
2H 2 O (l ) → O 2 (g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e – E ( cell ) = 1.23 V
The reaction at anode with lower value of E ⊖ is preferred and
therefore, water should get oxidised in preference to Cl – (aq). However,
on account of overpotential of oxygen, reaction (3.36) is preferred. Thus,
the net reactions may be summarised as:
H O
2
→ Na + (aq) + Cl – (aq)
NaCl (aq)  
Cathode:
H 2 O(l ) + e – → 1⁄2 H 2 (g) + OH – (aq)
Anode:
Cl – (aq) → 1⁄2 Cl 2 (g) + e –
Net reaction:
NaCl(aq) + H 2 O(l ) → Na + (aq) + OH – (aq) + 1⁄2H 2 (g) + 1⁄2Cl 2 (g)
The standard electrode potentials are replaced by electrode potentials
given by Nernst equation (Eq. 3.8) to take into account the concentration
effects. During the electrolysis of sulphuric acid, the following processes
are possible at the anode:
2H 2 O(l ) → O 2 (g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e –
V
E ( cell ) = +1.23 V
85
(3.38)
Electrochemistry2SO 42– (aq) → S 2 O 82– (aq) + 2e –
V
E ( cell ) = 1.96 V
(3.39)
For dilute sulphuric acid, reaction (3.38) is preferred but at higher
concentrations of H 2 SO 4 , reaction (3.39) is preferred.
Intext Questions
3.10 If a current of 0.5 ampere flows through a metallic wire for 2 hours,
then how many electrons would flow through the wire?
3.11 Suggest a list of metals that are extracted electrolytically.
3.12 Consider the reaction: Cr 2 O 72– + 14H + + 6e – → 2Cr 3+ + 7H 2 O
What is the quantity of electricity in coulombs needed to reduce 1 mol
of Cr 2 O 72– ?
3.6 Batteries
Any battery (actually it may have one or more than one cell connected
in series) or cell that we use as a source of electrical energy is basically
a galvanic cell where the chemical energy of the redox reaction is
converted into electrical energy. However, for a battery to be of practical
use it should be reasonably light, compact and its voltage should not
vary appreciably during its use. There are mainly two types of batteries.
In the primary batteries, the reaction occurs only once and after use
over a period of time battery becomes dead and cannot be reused
again. The most familiar example of this type is the dry
cell (known as Leclanche cell after its discoverer) which is
used commonly in our transistors and clocks. The cell
consists of a zinc container that also acts as anode and
the cathode is a carbon (graphite) rod surrounded by
powdered manganese dioxide and carbon (Fig.3.8). The
space between the electrodes is filled by a moist paste of
ammonium chloride (NH 4 Cl) and zinc chloride (ZnCl 2 ). The
electrode reactions are complex, but they can be written
approximately as follows :
Anode:
Zn(s) → Zn 2+ + 2e –
Cathode: MnO 2 + NH 4+ + e – → MnO(OH) + NH 3
In the reaction at cathode, manganese is reduced
from the + 4 oxidation state to the +3 state. Ammonia
produced in the reaction forms a complex with Zn 2+ to give
[Zn (NH 3 ) 4 ] 2+ . The cell has a potential of nearly 1.5 V.
Mercury cell, (Fig. 3.9) suitable for low current devices
like hearing aids, watches, etc. consists of zinc – mercury
amalgam as anode and a paste of HgO and carbon as the
Fig. 3.8: A commercial dry cell
cathode. The electrolyte is a paste of KOH and ZnO. The
consists of a graphite
electrode reactions for the cell are given below:
(carbon) cathode in a
Anode:
Zn(Hg) + 2OH – → ZnO(s) + H 2 O + 2e –
zinc container; the latter
Cathode: HgO + H 2 O + 2e – → Hg(l ) + 2OH –
acts as the anode.
3.6.1 Primary
Batteries
Chemistry
86The overall reaction is represented by
Zn(Hg) + HgO(s) → ZnO(s) + Hg(l )
The cell potential is approximately
1.35 V and remains constant during its
life as the overall reaction does not
involve any ion in solution whose
concentration can change during its life
time.
Fig. 3.9
Commonly used
mercury cell. The
reducing agent is
zinc and the
oxidising agent is
mercury (II) oxide.
3.6.2 Secondary
Batteries
A secondary cell after use can be recharged by passing current
through it in the opposite direction so that it can be used again. A
good secondary cell can undergo a large number of discharging
and charging cycles. The most important secondary cell is the lead
storage battery (Fig. 3.10) commonly used in automobiles and
invertors. It consists of a lead anode and a grid of lead packed with
lead dioxide (PbO 2 ) as cathode. A 38% solution of sulphuric acid
is used as an electrolyte.
The cell reactions when the battery is in use are given below:
Anode:
Pb(s) + SO 42– (aq) → PbSO 4 (s) + 2e –
Cathode: PbO 2 (s) + SO 42– (aq) + 4H + (aq) + 2e – → PbSO 4 (s) + 2H 2 O (l )
i.e., overall cell reaction consisting of cathode and anode reactions is:
Pb(s) + PbO 2 (s) + 2H 2 SO 4 (aq) → 2PbSO 4 (s) + 2H 2 O(l)
On charging the battery the reaction is reversed and PbSO 4 (s) on
anode and cathode is converted into Pb and PbO 2 , respectively.
Fig. 3.10: The Lead storage battery.
87
ElectrochemistryFig. 3.11
A rechargeable
nickel-cadmium cell
in a jelly roll
arrangement and
separated by a layer
soaked in moist
sodium or potassium
hydroxide.
Positive plate
Separator
Negative plate
Another important secondary
cell is the nickel-cadmium cell
(Fig. 3.11) which has longer life
than the lead storage cell but
more expensive to manufacture.
We shall not go into details of
working of the cell and the
electrode reactions during
charging and discharging.
The overall reaction during
discharge is:
Cd (s) + 2Ni(OH) 3 (s) → CdO (s) + 2Ni(OH) 2 (s) + H 2 O (l )
3.7 Fuel Cells
Production of electricity by thermal plants is not a very efficient method
and is a major source of pollution. In such plants, the chemical energy
(heat of combustion) of fossil fuels (coal, gas or oil) is first used for
converting water into high pressure steam. This is then used to run
a turbine to produce electricity. We know that a galvanic cell directly
converts chemical energy into electricity and is highly efficient. It is
now possible to make such cells in which reactants are fed continuously
to the electrodes and products are removed continuously from the
electrolyte compartment. Galvanic cells that are designed to convert
the energy of combustion of fuels like hydrogen, methane, methanol,
etc. directly into electrical energy are called fuel cells.
One of the most successful fuel cells
uses the reaction of hydrogen with
oxygen to form water (Fig. 3.12). The
cell was used for providing electrical
power in the Apollo space programme.
The water vapours produced during the
reaction were condensed and added to
the drinking water supply for the
astronauts. In the cell, hydrogen and
oxygen are bubbled through porous
carbon electrodes into concentrated
aqueous sodium hydroxide solution.
Catalysts like finely divided platinum or
palladium metal are incorporated into
the electrodes for increasing the rate of
Fig. 3.12: Fuel cell using H 2 and O 2 produces electricity. electrode reactions. The electrode
reactions are given below:
Cathode: O 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(l ) + 4e – → 4OH – (aq)
Anode:
2H 2 (g) + 4OH – (aq) → 4H 2 O(l) + 4e –
Overall reaction being:
2H 2 (g) + O 2 (g) → 2 H 2 O(l )
The cell runs continuously as long as the reactants are supplied.
Fuel cells produce electricity with an efficiency of about 70 % compared
Chemistry
88to thermal plants whose efficiency is about 40%. There has been
tremendous progress in the development of new electrode materials,
better catalysts and electrolytes for increasing the efficiency of fuel cells.
These have been used in automobiles on an experimental basis. Fuel
cells are pollution free and in view of their future importance, a variety
of fuel cells have been fabricated and tried.
3.8 Corrosion
Corrosion slowly coats the surfaces of metallic objects with oxides or
other salts of the metal. The rusting of iron, tarnishing of silver,
development of green coating on copper and bronze are some of the
examples of corrosion. It causes enormous damage
to buildings, bridges, ships and to all objects made
of metals especially that of iron. We lose crores of
rupees every year on account of corrosion.
In corrosion, a metal is oxidised by loss of electrons
to oxygen and formation of oxides. Corrosion of iron
(commonly known as rusting) occurs in presence of
water and air. The chemistry of corrosion is quite
complex but it may be considered
Oxidation: Fe (s)→ Fe 2+ (aq) +2e –
essentially as an electrochemical
Reduction: O 2 (g) + 4H + (aq) +4e – → 2H 2 O(l)
phenomenon. At a particular spot
Atomospheric
(Fig.
3.13) of an object made of
2+
+
oxidation: 2Fe (aq) + 2H 2 O(l) + 1⁄2O 2 (g) → Fe 2 O 3 (s) + 4H (aq)
iron, oxidation takes place and
that spot behaves as anode and
Fig. 3.13: Corrosion of iron in atmosphere
we can write the reaction
Anode: 2 Fe (s) → 2 Fe 2+ + 4 e –
E V (Fe 2+ /Fe) = – 0.44 V
Electrons released at anodic spot move through the metal and go
to another spot on the metal and reduce oxygen in presence of H +
(which is believed to be available from H 2 CO 3 formed due to dissolution
of carbon dioxide from air into water. Hydrogen ion in water may also
be available due to dissolution of other acidic oxides from the
atmosphere). This spot behaves as cathode with the reaction
V
Cathode: O 2 (g) + 4 H + (aq) + 4 e – → 2 H 2 O (l ) E H + | O 2 | H 2 O
The overall reaction being:
2Fe(s) + O 2 (g) + 4H + (aq) → 2Fe 2 + (aq) + 2 H 2 O (l)
= 1.23 V
E V (cell) =1.67 V
The ferrous ions are further oxidised by atmospheric oxygen to
ferric ions which come out as rust in the form of hydrated ferric oxide
(Fe 2 O 3 . x H 2 O) and with further production of hydrogen ions.
Prevention of corrosion is of prime importance. It not only saves
money but also helps in preventing accidents such as a bridge collapse
or failure of a key component due to corrosion. One of the simplest
methods of preventing corrosion is to prevent the surface of the metallic
object to come in contact with atmosphere. This can be done by covering
the surface with paint or by some chemicals (e.g. bisphenol). Another
simple method is to cover the surface by other metals (Sn, Zn, etc.) that
are inert or react to save the object. An electrochemical method is to
provide a sacrificial electrode of another metal (like Mg, Zn, etc.) which
corrodes itself but saves the object.
89
ElectrochemistryIntext Questions
3.13 Write the chemistry of recharging the lead storage battery, highlighting
all the materials that are involved during recharging.
3.14 Suggest two materials other than hydrogen that can be used as fuels in
fuel cells.
3.15 Explain how rusting of iron is envisaged as setting up of an
electrochemical cell.
The Hydrogen Economy
At present the main source of energy that is driving our economy is fossil fuels
such as coal, oil and gas. As more people on the planet aspire to improve their
standard of living, their energy requirement will increase. In fact, the per
capita consumption of energy used is a measure of development. Of course, it
is assumed that energy is used for productive purpose and not merely wasted.
We are already aware that carbon dioxide produced by the combustion of fossil
fuels is resulting in the ‘Greenhouse Effect’. This is leading to a rise in the
temperature of the Earth’s surface, causing polar ice to melt and ocean levels
to rise. This will flood low-lying areas along the coast and some island nations
such as Maldives face total submergence. In order to avoid such a catastrope,
we need to limit our use of carbonaceous fuels. Hydrogen provides an ideal
alternative as its combustion results in water only. Hydrogen production must
come from splitting water using solar energy. Therefore, hydrogen can be used
as a renewable and non polluting source of energy. This is the vision of the
Hydrogen Economy. Both the production of hydrogen by electrolysis of water
and hydrogen combustion in a fuel cell will be important in the future. And
both these technologies are based on electrochemical principles.
Summary
An electrochemical cell consists of two metallic electrodes dipping in electrolytic
solution(s). Thus an important component of the electrochemical cell is the ionic
conductor or electrolyte. Electrochemical cells are of two types. In galvanic cell,
the chemical energy of a spontaneous redox reaction is converted into electrical
work, whereas in an electrolytic cell, electrical energy is used to carry out a non-
spontaneous redox reaction. The standard electrode potential for any electrode
dipping in an appropriate solution is defined with respect to standard electrode
potential of hydrogen electrode taken as zero. The standard potential of the cell
can be obtained by taking the difference of the standard potentials of cathode and
V
V
V
anode ( E ( cell ) = E cathode – E anode). The standard potential of the cells are
V
V
related to standard Gibbs energy (∆ rG = –nF E ( cell ) ) and equilibrium constant
V
(∆ rG = – RT ln K) of the reaction taking place in the cell. Concentration dependence
of the potentials of the electrodes and the cells are given by Nernst equation.
The conductivity, κ , of an electrolytic solution depends on the concentration
of the electrolyte, nature of solvent and temperature. Molar conductivity, Λ m , is
defined by = κ /c where c is the concentration. Conductivity decreases but molar
conductivity increases with decrease in concentration. It increases slowly with
decrease in concentration for strong electrolytes while the increase is very steep
for weak electrolytes in very dilute solutions. Kohlrausch found that molar
conductivity at infinite dilution, for an electrolyte is sum of the contribution of the
Chemistry
90molar conductivity of the ions in which it dissociates. It is known as law of
independent migration of ions and has many applications. Ions conduct electricity
through the solution but oxidation and reduction of the ions take place at the
electrodes in an electrochemical cell. Batteries and fuel cells are very useful
forms of galvanic cell. Corrosion of metals is essentially an electrochemical
phenomenon. Electrochemical principles are relevant to the Hydrogen Economy.
Exercises
3.1
Arrange the following metals in the order in which they displace each other
from the solution of their salts.
Al, Cu, Fe, Mg and Zn.
3.2
Given the standard electrode potentials,
K + /K = –2.93V, Ag + /Ag = 0.80V,
Hg 2+ /Hg = 0.79V
Mg 2+ /Mg = –2.37 V, Cr 3+ /Cr = – 0.74V
Arrange these metals in their increasing order of reducing power.
3.3
Depict the galvanic cell in which the reaction
Zn(s)+2Ag + (aq) →Zn 2+ (aq)+2Ag(s) takes place. Further show:
(i) Which of the electrode is negatively charged?
(ii) The carriers of the current in the cell.
(iii) Individual reaction at each electrode.
3.4
Calculate the standard cell potentials of galvanic cell in which the following
reactions take place:
(i) 2Cr(s) + 3Cd 2+ (aq)
2+
→ 2Cr 3+ (aq) + 3Cd
+
(ii) Fe (aq) + Ag (aq) → Fe 3+ (aq) + Ag(s)
Calculate the ∆ r G ⊖ and equilibrium constant of the reactions.
3.5
Write the Nernst equation and emf of the following cells at 298 K:
(i) Mg(s)|Mg 2+ (0.001M)||Cu 2+ (0.0001 M)|Cu(s)
(ii) Fe(s)|Fe 2+ (0.001M)||H + (1M)|H 2 (g)(1bar)| Pt(s)
(iii) Sn(s)|Sn 2+ (0.050 M)||H + (0.020 M)|H 2 (g) (1 bar)|Pt(s)
(iv) Pt(s)|Br – (0.010 M)|Br 2 (l )||H + (0.030 M)| H 2 (g) (1 bar)|Pt(s).
3.6
In the button cells widely used in watches and other devices the following
reaction takes place:
Zn(s) + Ag 2 O(s) + H 2 O(l ) → Zn 2+ (aq) + 2Ag(s) + 2OH – (aq)
Determine ∆ r G ⊖ and E ⊖ for the reaction.
3.7 Define conductivity and molar conductivity for the solution of an electrolyte.
Discuss their variation with concentration.
3.8 The conductivity of 0.20 M solution of KCl at 298 K is 0.0248 S cm –1 . Calculate
its molar conductivity.
3.9 The resistance of a conductivity cell containing 0.001M KCl solution at 298
K is 1500 Ω. What is the cell constant if conductivity of 0.001M KCl solution
at 298 K is 0.146 × 10 –3 S cm –1 .
91
Electrochemistry3.10
The conductivity of sodium chloride at 298 K has been determined at different
concentrations and the results are given below:
Concentration/M 0.001 0.010 0.020 0.050
10 × κ /S m 11.85 23.15 55.53 106.74
2
–1
1.237
0.100
Calculate Λ m for all concentrations and draw a plot between Λ m and c 1⁄2 .
Find the value of Λ 0 m .
3.11
Conductivity of 0.00241 M acetic acid is 7.896 × 10 –5 S cm –1 . Calculate its
molar conductivity. If Λ 0 m for acetic acid is 390.5 S cm 2 mol –1 , what is its
dissociation constant?
3.12 How much charge is required for the following reductions:
(i) 1 mol of Al 3+ to Al ?
(ii) 1 mol of Cu 2+ to Cu ?
(iii) 1 mol of MnO 4– to Mn 2+ ?
3.13 How much electricity in terms of Faraday is required to produce
(i) 20.0 g of Ca from molten CaCl 2 ?
(ii) 40.0 g of Al from molten Al 2 O 3 ?
3.14
How much electricity is required in coulomb for the oxidation of
(i) 1 mol of H 2 O to O 2 ?
(ii) 1 mol of FeO to Fe 2 O 3 ?
3.15 A solution of Ni(NO 3 ) 2 is electrolysed between platinum electrodes using a
current of 5 amperes for 20 minutes. What mass of Ni is deposited at the
cathode?
3.16 Three electrolytic cells A,B,C containing solutions of ZnSO 4 , AgNO 3 and CuSO 4 ,
respectively are connected in series. A steady current of 1.5 amperes was
passed through them until 1.45 g of silver deposited at the cathode of cell B.
How long did the current flow? What mass of copper and zinc were deposited?
3.17 Using the standard electrode potentials given in Table 3.1, predict if the
reaction between the following is feasible:
(i) Fe 3+ (aq) and I – (aq)
(ii) Ag + (aq) and Cu(s)
(iii) Fe 3+ (aq) and Br – (aq)
(iv) Ag(s) and Fe
3+
(aq)
2+
(v) Br 2 (aq) and Fe
3.18
(aq).
Predict the products of electrolysis in each of the following:
(i) An aqueous solution of AgNO 3 with silver electrodes.
(ii) An aqueous solution of AgNO 3 with platinum electrodes.
(iii) A dilute solution of H 2 SO 4 with platinum electrodes.
(iv) An aqueous solution of CuCl 2 with platinum electrodes.
Answers to Some Intext Questions
3.5 E (cell) = 0.91 V
3.6 ∆ r G V = − 45.54 kJ mol − 1 , K c = 9.62 ×10 7
3.9 0.114, 3.67 ×10 –4 mol L –1
Chemistry
92
Unit
4
Objectives
Chemical K
ine
tics
Kine
inetics
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
define
the
average
and
instantaneous rate of a reaction;
express the rate of a reaction in
terms of change in concentration
of either of the reactants or
products with time;
distinguish between elementary
and complex reactions;
differentiate
between
the
molecularity and order of a
reaction;
define rate constant;
discuss the dependence of rate of
reactions
on
concentration,
temperature and catalyst;
derive integrated rate equations
for the zero and first order
reactions;
determine the rate constants for
zeroth and first order reactions;
describe collision theory.
Chemical Kinetics helps us to understand how chemical reactions
occur.
Chemistry, by its very nature, is concerned with change.
Substances with well defined properties are converted
by chemical reactions into other substances with
different properties. For any chemical reaction, chemists
try to find out
(a) the feasibility of a chemical reaction which can be
predicted by thermodynamics ( as you know that a
reaction with ∆G < 0, at constant temperature and
pressure is feasible);
(b) extent to which a reaction will proceed can be
determined from chemical equilibrium;
(c) speed of a reaction i.e. time taken by a reaction to
reach equilibrium.
Along with feasibility and extent, it is equally
important to know the rate and the factors controlling
the rate of a chemical reaction for its complete
understanding. For example, which parameters
determine as to how rapidly food gets spoiled? How
to design a rapidly setting material for dental filling?
Or what controls the rate at which fuel burns in an
auto engine? All these questions can be answered by
the branch of chemistry, which deals with the study
of reaction rates and their mechanisms, called
chemical kinetics. The word kinetics is derived from
the Greek word ‘kinesis’ meaning movement.
Thermodynamics tells only about the feasibility of a
reaction whereas chemical kinetics tells about the rate
of a reaction. For example, thermodynamic data
indicate that diamond shall convert to graphite but
in reality the conversion rate is so slow that the change
is not perceptible at all. Therefore, most people thinkthat diamond is forever. Kinetic studies not only help us to determine
the speed or rate of a chemical reaction but also describe the
conditions by which the reaction rates can be altered. The factors
such as concentration, temperature, pressure and catalyst affect the
rate of a reaction. At the macroscopic level, we are interested in
amounts reacted or formed and the rates of their consumption or
formation. At the molecular level, the reaction mechanisms involving
orientation and energy of molecules undergoing collisions,
are discussed.
In this Unit, we shall be dealing with average and instantaneous
rate of reaction and the factors affecting these. Some elementary
ideas about the collision theory of reaction rates are also given.
However, in order to understand all these, let us first learn about the
reaction rate.
4 . 1 Rate of a
Chemical
Reaction
Some reactions such as ionic reactions occur very fast, for example,
precipitation of silver chloride occurs instantaneously by mixing of
aqueous solutions of silver nitrate and sodium chloride. On the other
hand, some reactions are very slow, for example, rusting of iron in
the presence of air and moisture. Also there are reactions like inversion
of cane sugar and hydrolysis of starch, which proceed with a moderate
speed. Can you think of more examples from each category?
You must be knowing that speed of an automobile is expressed in
terms of change in the position or distance covered by it in a certain
period of time. Similarly, the speed of a reaction or the rate of a
reaction can be defined as the change in concentration of a reactant
or product in unit time. To be more specific, it can be expressed in
terms of:
(i) the rate of decrease in concentration of any one of the
reactants, or
(ii) the rate of increase in concentration of any one of the products.
Consider a hypothetical reaction, assuming that the volume of the
system remains constant.
R → P
One mole of the reactant R produces one mole of the product P. If
[R] 1 and [P] 1 are the concentrations of R and P respectively at time t 1
and [R] 2 and [P] 2 are their concentrations at time t 2 then,
∆t
= t 2 – t 1
∆[R] = [R] 2 – [R] 1
∆ [P] = [P] 2 – [P] 1
The square brackets in the above expressions are used to express
molar concentration.
Rate of disappearance of R
=
Chemistry
94
Decrease in concentration of R
∆ [ R ]
=−
Time taken
∆ t
(4.1)Rate of appearance of P
Increase in concentration of P
∆ [ P ]
=+
(4.2)
Time taken
∆ t
Since, ∆[R] is a negative quantity (as concentration of reactants is
decreasing), it is multiplied with –1 to make the rate of the reaction a
positive quantity.
Equations (4.1) and (4.2) given above represent the average rate of
a reaction, r av .
Average rate depends upon the change in concentration of reactants
or products and the time taken for that change to occur (Fig. 4.1) .
=
{
}
Fig. 4.1: Instantaneous and average rate of a reaction
Units of rate of a reaction
From equations (4.1) and (4.2), it is clear that units of rate are
concentration time –1 . For example, if concentration is in mol L –1 and
time is in seconds then the units will be mol L -1 s –1 . However, in gaseous
reactions, when the concentration of gases is expressed in terms of their
partial pressures, then the units of the rate equation will be atm s –1 .
From the concentrations of C 4 H 9 Cl (butyl chloride) at different times given
below, calculate the average rate of the reaction:
Example 4.1
C 4 H 9 Cl + H 2 O → C 4 H 9 OH + HCl
during different intervals of time.
t/s
0
50
100
150
200
300
400
700
800
[C 4 H 9 Cl]/mol L –1 0.100 0.0905 0.0820 0.0741 0.0671 0.0549 0.0439 0.0210 0.017
We can determine the difference in concentration over different intervals
of time and thus determine the average rate by dividing ∆ [R] by ∆ t
(Table 4.1).
95
Solution
Chemical KineticsTable 4.1: Average rates of hydrolysis of butyl chloride
[C 4 H 9 CI] t / mol L –1 mol L –1 0.100 0.0905 0 50 1.90
0.0905 0.0820 50 100 1.70
0.0820 0.0741 100 150 1.58
0.0741 0.0671 150 200 1.40
0.0671 0.0549 200 300 1.22
0.0549 0.0439 300 400 1.10
0.0439 0.0335 400 500 1.04
0.0210 0.017 700 800 0.4
1
2
t 1 /s
t 2 /s
r av × 10 4 /mol L –1 s –1
[C 4 H 9 CI] t /
= –
{ [ C H Cl ]
4
9
t 2
}
– [ C 4 H 9 Cl ] t / ( t 2 − t 1 ) × 10 4
1
It can be seen (Table 4.1) that the average rate falls from 1.90 × 0 -4 mol L -1 s -1
to 0.4 × 10 -4 mol L -1 s -1 . However, average rate cannot be used to predict
the rate of a reaction at a particular instant as it would be constant for the
time interval for which it is calculated. So, to express the rate at a particular
moment of time we determine the instantaneous rate. It is obtained when
we consider the average rate at the smallest time interval say dt ( i.e. when
∆ t approaches zero). Hence, mathematically for an infinitesimally small
dt instantaneous rate is given by
r av =
−∆ [ R ] ∆ [ P ]
=
∆ t
∆ t
As ∆t → 0
Fig 4.2
Instantaneous rate of
hydrolysis of butyl
chloride(C 4 H 9 Cl)
Chemistry
96
or
(4.3)
r inst =
− d [ R ] d [ P ]
=
d t
d tIt can be determined graphically by drawing a tangent at time t on
either of the curves for concentration of R and P vs time t and calculating
its slope (Fig. 4.1). So in problem 4.1, r inst at 600s for example, can be
calculated by plotting concentration of butyl chloride as a function of
time. A tangent is drawn that touches the curve at t = 600 s (Fig. 4.2).
The slope of this tangent gives the instantaneous rate.
 0.0165 – 0.037 
So, r inst at 600 s = -  ( 800 – 400 ) s  mol L –1 = 5.12 × 10 –5 mol L –1 s –1


At t = 250 s r inst = 1.22 × 10 –4 mol L –1 s –1
t = 350 s r inst = 1.0 × 10 –4 mol L –1 s –1
t = 450 s r inst = 6.4 × 10 –5 mol L –1 s –1
Now consider a reaction
Hg(l) + Cl 2 (g) → HgCl 2 (s)
Where stoichiometric coefficients of the reactants and products are
same, then rate of the reaction is given as
Rate of reaction = –
∆ [ Hg ]
∆ [ Cl 2 ] ∆ [ HgCl 2 ]
= –
=
∆ t
∆ t
∆ t
i.e., rate of disappearance of any of the reactants is same as the rate
of appearance of the products. But in the following reaction, two moles of
HI decompose to produce one mole each of H 2 and I 2,
2HI(g) → H 2 (g) + I 2 (g)
For expressing the rate of such a reaction where stoichiometric
coefficients of reactants or products are not equal to one, rate of
disappearance of any of the reactants or the rate of appearance of
products is divided by their respective stoichiometric coefficients. Since
rate of consumption of HI is twice the rate of formation of H 2 or I 2 , to
make them equal, the term ∆[HI] is divided by 2. The rate of this reaction
is given by
Rate of reaction = −
1 ∆ [ HI ] ∆ [ H 2 ] ∆ [ I 2 ]
=
=
2 ∆ t
∆ t
∆ t
Similarly, for the reaction
5 Br - (aq) + BrO 3– (aq) + 6 H + (aq) → 3 Br 2 (aq) + 3 H 2 O (l)
Rate = −
∆  BrO 3 −  
1 ∆ [ Br − ]
1 ∆ [ H + ] 1 ∆ [ Br 2 ] 1 ∆ [ H 2 O ]
=− 
=−
=
=
5 ∆ t
∆ t
6 ∆ t
3 ∆ t
3
∆ t
For a gaseous reaction at constant temperature, concentration is
directly proportional to the partial pressure of a species and hence, rate
can also be expressed as rate of change in partial pressure of the reactant
or the product.
97
Chemical KineticsExample 4.2 The decomposition of N 2 O 5 in CCl 4 at 318K has been studied by
monitoring the concentration of N 2 O 5 in the solution. Initially the
concentration of N 2 O 5 is 2.33 mol L –1 and after 184 minutes, it is reduced
to 2.08 mol L –1 . The reaction takes place according to the equation
2 N 2 O 5 (g) → 4 NO 2 (g) + O 2 (g)
Calculate the average rate of this reaction in terms of hours, minutes
and seconds. What is the rate of production of NO 2 during this period?
Solution
1  ∆ [ N 2 O 5 ] 
1  ( 2.08 − 2.33 ) mol L − 1 
 −
 =− 

2 
2 
184 min
∆ t


= 6.79 × 10 –4 mol L –1 /min = (6.79 × 10 –4 mol L –1 min –1 ) × (60 min/1h)
= 4.07 × 10 –2 mol L –1 /h
= 6.79 × 10 –4 mol L –1 × 1min/60s
= 1.13 × 10 –5 mol L –1 s –1
It may be remembered that
Average Rate =
Rate =
1  ∆ [ NO 2 ] 


4  ∆ t 
∆ [ NO 2 ]
= 6.79 × 10 –4 × 4 mol L –1 min –1 = 2.72 × 10 –3 mol L –1 min –1
∆ t
Intext Questions
4.1 For the reaction R → P, the concentration of a reactant changes from 0.03M
to 0.02M in 25 minutes. Calculate the average rate of reaction using units
of time both in minutes and seconds.
4.2 In a reaction, 2A → Products, the concentration of A decreases from 0.5
mol L –1 to 0.4 mol L –1 in 10 minutes. Calculate the rate during this interval?
4.2 Factors Influencing
Rate of a Reaction
Rate of reaction depends upon the experimental conditions such
as concentration of reactants (pressure in case of gases),
temperature and catalyst.
4.2.1 Dependence
of Rate on
Concentration The rate of a chemical reaction at a given temperature may depend on
the concentration of one or more reactants and products. The
representation of rate of reaction in terms of concentration of the
reactants is known as rate law. It is also called as rate equation or rate
expression.
4.2.2 Rate
Expression
and Rate
Constant The results in Table 4.1 clearly show that rate of a reaction decreases with
the passage of time as the concentration of reactants decrease. Conversely,
rates generally increase when reactant concentrations increase. So, rate of
a reaction depends upon the concentration of reactants.
Chemistry
98Consider a general reaction
aA + bB
→
cC + dD
where a, b, c and d are the stoichiometric coefficients of reactants
and products.
The rate expression for this reaction is
x
y
Rate ∝ [A] [B]
(4.4)
where exponents x and y may or may not be equal to the
stoichiometric coefficients (a and b) of the reactants. Above equation
can also be written as
x
y
Rate = k [A] [B]
(4.4a)
d [ R ]
−
= k [ A ] x [ B ] y
(4.4b)
d t
This form of equation (4.4 b) is known as differential rate equation,
where k is a proportionality constant called rate constant. The equation
like (4.4), which relates the rate of a reaction to concentration of reactants
is called rate law or rate expression. Thus, rate law is the expression
in which reaction rate is given in terms of molar concentration
of reactants with each term raised to some power, which may
or may not be same as the stoichiometric coefficient of the
reacting species in a balanced chemical equation. For example:
2NO(g) + O 2 (g) → 2NO 2 (g)
We can measure the rate of this reaction as a function of initial
concentrations either by keeping the concentration of one of the reactants
constant and changing the concentration of the other reactant or by
changing the concentration of both the reactants. The following results
are obtained (Table 4.2).
Table 4.2: Initial rate of formation of NO 2
Experiment
Initial [NO]/ mol L -1
Initial [O 2 ]/ mol L -1
Initial rate of
formation of NO 2 / mol L -1 s -1
1. 0.30 0.30 0.096
2. 0.60 0.30 0.384
3. 0.30 0.60 0.192
4. 0.60 0.60 0.768
It is obvious, after looking at the results, that when the concentration
of NO is doubled and that of O 2 is kept constant then the initial rate
increases by a factor of four from 0.096 to 0.384 mol L –1 s –1 . This
indicates that the rate depends upon the square of the concentration of
NO. When concentration of NO is kept constant and concentration of
O 2 is doubled the rate also gets doubled indicating that rate depends
on concentration of O 2 to the first power. Hence, the rate equation for
this reaction will be
2
Rate = k[NO] [O 2 ]
99
Chemical KineticsThe differential form of this rate expression is given as
d [ R ]
−
= k [ NO ] 2 [ O 2 ]
d t
Now, we observe that for this reaction in the rate equation derived
from the experimental data, the exponents of the concentration terms
are the same as their stoichiometric coefficients in the balanced
chemical equation.
Some other examples are given below:
Reaction
Experimental rate expression
1. CHCl 3 + Cl 2 → CCl 4 + HCl
Rate = k [CHCl 3 ] [Cl 2 ] 1/2
1
0
2. CH 3 COOC 2 H 5 + H 2 O → CH 3 COOH + C 2 H 5 OH Rate = k [CH 3 COOC 2 H 5 ] [H 2 O]
In these reactions, the exponents of the concentration terms are not
the same as their stoichiometric coefficients. Thus, we can say that:
Rate law for any reaction cannot be predicted by merely looking
at the balanced chemical equation, i.e., theoretically but must be
determined experimentally.
4.2.3 Order of a
Reaction
In the rate equation (4.4)
Rate = k [A] x [B] y
x and y indicate how sensitive the rate is to the change in concentration
of A and B. Sum of these exponents, i.e., x + y in (4.4) gives the overall
order of a reaction whereas x and y represent the order with respect
to the reactants A and B respectively.
Hence, the sum of powers of the concentration of the reactants
in the rate law expression is called the order of that chemical
reaction.
Order of a reaction can be 0, 1, 2, 3 and even a fraction. A zero
order reaction means that the rate of reaction is independent of the
concentration of reactants.
Example 4.3 Calculate the overall order of a reaction which
Solution
has the rate expression
(a) Rate = k [A] 1/2 [B] 3/2
(b) Rate = k [A] 3/2 [B] –1
(a) Rate = k [A] x [B] y
order = x + y
So order = 1/2 + 3/2 = 2, i.e., second order
(b) order = 3/2 + (–1) = 1/2, i.e., half order.
A balanced chemical equation never gives us a true picture of how
a reaction takes place since rarely a reaction gets completed in one
step. The reactions taking place in one step are called elementary
reactions. When a sequence of elementary reactions (called mechanism)
gives us the products, the reactions are called complex reactions.
Chemistry 100These may be consecutive reactions (e.g., oxidation of ethane to CO 2
and H 2 O passes through a series of intermediate steps in which alcohol,
aldehyde and acid are formed), reverse reactions and side reactions
(e.g., nitration of phenol yields o-nitrophenol and p-nitrophenol).
Units of rate constant
For a general reaction
aA + bB → cC + dD
x
y
Rate = k [A] [B]
Where x + y = n = order of the reaction
Rate
k =
[A] x [B] y
concentration
1
=
×
time
concentration
(
) n
( where [A] = [B] )
Taking SI units of concentration, mol L –1 and time, s, the units of
k for different reaction order are listed in Table 4.3
Table 4.3: Units of rate constant
Reaction
Zero order reaction
First order reaction
Second order reaction
Order
Units of rate constant
0 mol L − 1
1
×
= mol L − 1 s − 1
− 1 0
s
( mol L )
1 mol L − 1
1
×
= s − 1
1
1
−
s
( mol L )
2 mol L − 1
1
×
= mol − 1 L s − 1
− 1 2
s
( mol L )
Identify the reaction order from each of the following rate constants.
(i) k = 2.3 × 10 –5 L mol –1 s –1
(ii) k = 3 × 10 –4 s –1
(i) The unit of second order rate constant is L mol –1 s –1 , therefore
k = 2.3 × 10 –5 L mol –1 s –1 represents a second order reaction.
(ii) The unit of a first order rate constant is s –1 therefore
k = 3 × 10 –4 s –1 represents a first order reaction.
4.2.4 Molecularity
of a
Reaction
Example 4.4
Solution
Another property of a reaction called molecularity helps in
understanding its mechanism.
The number of reacting species
(atoms, ions or molecules) taking part in an elementary reaction,
which must collide simultaneously in order to bring about a
chemical reaction is called molecularity of a reaction. The reaction
can be unimolecular when one reacting species is involved, for example,
decomposition of ammonium nitrite.
101 Chemical KineticsNH 4 NO 2 → N 2 + 2H 2 O
Bimolecular reactions involve simultaneous collision between two
species, for example, dissociation of hydrogen iodide.
2HI → H 2 + I 2
Trimolecular or termolecular reactions involve simultaneous collision
between three reacting species, for example,
2NO + O 2 → 2NO 2
The probability that more than three molecules can collide and
react simultaneously is very small. Hence, reactions with the
molecularity three are very rare and slow to proceed.
It is, therefore, evident that complex reactions involving more than
three molecules in the stoichiometric equation must take place in more
than one step.
KClO 3 + 6FeSO 4 + 3H 2 SO 4 → KCl + 3Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 + 3H 2 O
This reaction which apparently seems to be of tenth order is actually
a second order reaction. This shows that this reaction takes place in
several steps. Which step controls the rate of the overall reaction? The
question can be answered if we go through the mechanism of reaction,
for example, chances to win the relay race competition by a team
depend upon the slowest person in the team. Similarly, the overall rate
of the reaction is controlled by the slowest step in a reaction called the
rate determining step. Consider the decomposition of hydrogen
peroxide which is catalysed by iodide ion in an alkaline medium.
I -
→ 2H 2 O + O 2
2H 2 O 2 
Alkaline medium
The rate equation for this reaction is found to be
− d [ H 2 O 2 ]
= k [ H 2 O 2 ] [ I − ]
d t
This reaction is first order with respect to both H 2 O 2 and I – . Evidences
suggest that this reaction takes place in two steps
Rate =
(1) H 2 O 2 + I – → H 2 O + IO –
(2) H 2 O 2 + IO – → H 2 O + I – + O 2
Both the steps are bimolecular elementary reactions. Species IO - is
called as an intermediate since it is formed during the course of the
reaction but not in the overall balanced equation. The first step, being
slow, is the rate determining step. Thus, the rate of formation of
intermediate will determine the rate of this reaction.
Thus, from the discussion, till now, we conclude the following:
(i) Order of a reaction is an experimental quantity. It can be zero and
even a fraction but molecularity cannot be zero or a non integer.
(ii) Order is applicable to elementary as well as complex reactions
whereas molecularity is applicable only for elementary reactions.
For complex reaction molecularity has no meaning.
Chemistry 102(iii) For complex reaction, order is given by the slowest step and
molecularity of the slowest step is same as the order of the overall
reaction.
Intext Questions
4.3 For a reaction, A + B → Product; the rate law is given by, r = k [ A] 1/2 [B] 2 .
What is the order of the reaction?
4.4 The conversion of molecules X to Y follows second order kinetics. If
concentration of X is increased to three times how will it affect the rate of
formation of Y ?
4 . 3 Integrated
Rate
Equations We have already noted that the concentration dependence of rate is
called differential rate equation. It is not always convenient to
determine the instantaneous rate, as it is measured by determination
of slope of the tangent at point ‘t’ in concentration vs time plot
(Fig. 4.1). This makes it difficult to determine the rate law and hence
the order of the reaction. In order to avoid this difficulty, we can
integrate the differential rate equation to give a relation between directly
measured experimental data, i.e., concentrations at different times
and rate constant.
The integrated rate equations are different for the reactions of different
reaction orders. We shall determine these equations only for zero and
first order chemical reactions.
4.3.1 Zero Order
Reactions Zero order reaction means that the rate of the reaction is proportional
to zero power of the concentration of reactants. Consider the reaction,
R → P
d [ R ]
= k [ R ] 0
Rate = −
d t
As any quantity raised to power zero is unity
d [ R ]
= k × 1
d t
d[R] = – k dt
Rate = −
Integrating both sides
[R] = – k t + I
(4.5)
where, I is the constant of integration.
At t = 0, the concentration of the reactant R = [R] 0 , where [R] 0 is
initial concentration of the reactant.
Substituting in equation (4.5)
[R] 0 = –k × 0 + I
[R] 0 = I
Substituting the value of I in the equation (4.5)
[R] = -kt + [R] 0
(4.6)
103 Chemical KineticsComparing (4.6) with equation of a straight line,
y = mx + c, if we plot [R] against t, we get a straight
line (Fig. 4.3) with slope = –k and intercept equal
to [R] 0 .
Further simplifying equation (4.6), we get the rate
constant, k as
[R 0 ]
0
k = -slope
k =
Time
Fig. 4.3: Variation in the concentration vs
time plot for a zero order reaction
[ R ] 0 − [ R ]
t
(4.7)
Zero order reactions are relatively uncommon but
they occur under special conditions. Some enzyme
catalysed reactions and reactions which occur on
metal surfaces are a few examples of zero order
reactions. The decomposition of gaseous ammonia
on a hot platinum surface is a zero order reaction at
high pressure.
1130K
2NH 3 ( g ) 
→ N 2 ( g ) +3H 2 ( g )
Pt catalyst
Rate = k [NH 3 ] 0 = k
In this reaction, platinum metal acts as a catalyst. At high pressure,
the metal surface gets saturated with gas molecules. So, a further
change in reaction conditions is unable to alter the amount of ammonia
on the surface of the catalyst making rate of the reaction independent
of its concentration. The thermal decomposition of HI on gold surface
is another example of zero order reaction.
4.3.2 First Order
Reactions
In this class of reactions, the rate of the reaction is proportional to the
first power of the concentration of the reactant R. For example,
R → P
Rate = −
or
d [ R ]
= k [ R ]
d t
d [ R ]
= – k d t
[ R ]
Integrating this equation, we get
ln [R] = – kt + I
(4.8)
Again, I is the constant of integration and its value can be determined
easily.
When t = 0, R = [R] 0 , where [R] 0 is the initial concentration of the
reactant.
Therefore, equation (4.8) can be written as
ln [R] 0 = –k × 0 + I
ln [R] 0 = I
Substituting the value of I in equation (4.8)
ln[R] = -kt + ln[R] 0
Chemistry 104
(4.9)Rearranging this equation
ln
[ R ]
= − kt
[ R ] 0
or k =
[ R ] 0
1
ln
t
[ R ]
(4.10)
At time t 1 from equation (4.8)
*ln[R] 1 = – kt 1 + *ln[R] 0
(4.11)
At time t 2
ln[R] 2 = – kt 2 + ln[R] 0
(4.12)
where, [R] 1 and [R] 2 are the concentrations of the reactants at time
t 1 and t 2 respectively.
Subtracting (4.12) from (4.11)
ln[R] 1 – ln[R] 2 = – kt 1 – (–kt 2 )
ln
[ R ] 1
= k ( t 2 − t 1 )
[ R ] 2
k =
1
[ R ] 1
ln
( t 2 − t 1 ) [ R ] 2
(4.13)
Equation (4.9) can also be written as
ln
[ R ]
= − kt
[ R ] 0
Taking antilog of both sides
[R] = [R] 0 e -kt
(4.14)
Comparing equation (4.9) with y = mx + c, if we plot ln [R] against
t (Fig. 4.4) we get a straight line with slope = –k and intercept equal to
ln [R] 0
The first order rate equation (4.10) can also be written in the form
k =
[ R ] 0
2.303
log
t
[ R ]
(4.15)
[ ]
kt
* log R 0 =
[ R ] 2.303
If we plot a graph between log [R] 0 /[R] vs t, (Fig. 4.5),
the slope = k/2.303
Hydrogenation of ethene is an example of first order reaction.
C 2 H 4 (g) + H 2 (g) → C 2 H 6 (g)
Rate = k [C 2 H 4 ]
All natural and artificial radioactive decay of unstable nuclei take
place by first order kinetics.
* Refer to Appendix-IV for ln and log (logarithms).
105 Chemical KineticsSlope = k /2.303
0
Fig. 4.4: A plot between ln[R] and t
for a first order reaction
226
88
Ra → 2 4 He +
Time
Fig. 4.5: Plot of log [R] 0 /[R] vs time for a first
order reaction
222
86
Rn
Rate = k [Ra]
Decomposition of N 2 O 5 and N 2 O are some more examples of first
order reactions.
Example 4.5 The initial concentration of N 2 O 5 in the following first order reaction
N 2 O 5 (g) → 2 NO 2 (g) + 1/2O 2 (g) was 1.24 × 10 –2 mol L –1 at 318 K. The
concentration of N 2 O 5 after 60 minutes was 0.20 × 10 –2 mol L –1 .
Calculate the rate constant of the reaction at 318 K.
Solution For a first order reaction
[ R ] 1
k ( t 2 − t 1 )
log
[ R ] 2
=
2.303
[ R ] 1
2.303
k = ( t − t ) log [ ]
R 2
2
1
= 1.24 × 10 − 2 mol L − 1
2.303
log
( 60 min − 0 min ) 0.20 × 10 − 2 mol L − 1
= 2.303
log 6.2 min − 1
60
k = 0.0304 min -1
Let us consider a typical first order gas phase reaction
A(g) → B(g) + C(g)
Let p i be the initial pressure of A and p t the total pressure at
time ‘t’. Integrated rate equation for such a reaction can be derived as
Total pressure p t = p A + p B + p C (pressure units)
Chemistry 106p A , p B and p C are the partial pressures of A, B and C, respectively.
If x atm be the decrease in pressure of A at time t and one mole each
of B and C is being formed, the increase in pressure of B and C will also
be x atm each.
A(g)
p i atm
(p i –x) atm
At t = 0
At time t
→
B(g)
0 atm
x atm
+
C(g)
0 atm
x atm
where, p i is the initial pressure at time t = 0.
p t = (p i – x) + x + x = p i + x
x = (p t - p i )
where, p A = p i – x = p i – (p t – p i )
= 2p i – p t
 2.303   log p i 
k = 

p A  
 t 
=
(4.16)
p i
2.303
log
t
( 2 p i − p t )
The following data were obtained during the first order thermal
decomposition of N 2 O 5 (g) at constant volume:
Example 4.6
2N 2 O 5 ( g ) → 2N 2 O 4 ( g ) + O 2 ( g )
S.No.
Time/s
1.
0
2.
100
Calculate the rate constant.
Total Pressure/(atm)
0.5
0.512
Let the pressure of N 2 O 5 (g) decrease by 2x atm. As two moles of
N 2 O 5 decompose to give two moles of N 2 O 4 (g) and one mole of O 2 (g),
the pressure of N 2 O 4 (g) increases by 2x atm and that of O 2 (g)
increases by x atm.
2N 2 O 5 ( g )
Start t = 0
At time t
→
0.5 atm
(0.5 – 2x) atm
2N 2 O 4 ( g )
0 atm
2x atm
+
Solution
O 2 ( g )
0 atm
x atm
p t = p N 2 O 5 + p N 2 O 4 + p O 2
= (0.5 – 2x) + 2x + x = 0.5 + x
x = p t − 0.5
p N 2 O 5
At
= 0.5 – 2x
= 0.5 – 2 (p t – 0.5) = 1.5 – 2p t
t = 100 s; p t = 0.512 atm
107 Chemical Kineticsp N 2 O 5
= 1.5 – 2 × 0.512 = 0.476 atm
Using equation (4.16)
p
0.5 atm
2.303
2.303
log i =
log
t
p A
100 s
0.476 atm
k =
=
4.3.3 Half-Life of a
Reaction
2.303
× 0.0216 = 4.98 × 10 − 4 s − 1
100 s
The half-life of a reaction is the time in which the concentration of a
reactant is reduced to one half of its initial concentration. It is
represented as t 1/2 .
For a zero order reaction, rate constant is given by equation 4.7.
k =
[ R ] 0 − [ R ]
t
At t = t 1/ 2 , [ R ] =
1 [ R ] 0
2
The rate constant at t 1/2 becomes
k =
[ R ] 0 − 1/ 2 [ R ] 0
t 1/ 2
t 1/ 2 =
[ R ] 0
2 k
It is clear that t 1/2 for a zero order reaction is directly proportional
to the initial concentration of the reactants and inversely proportional
to the rate constant.
For the first order reaction,
k =
2.303
[ R ] 0
log
t
[ R ]
at t 1/2
[ R ] =
[ R ] 0
2
So, the above equation becomes
k =
or
(4.16)
2.303
[ R ] 0
log
t 1/ 2
[ R ] / 2
2.303
log 2
k
2.303
=
× 0.301
k
0.693
=
k
t 1/ 2 =
t 1/ 2
t 1/ 2
Chemistry 108
(4.15)
(4.17)It can be seen that for a first order reaction, half-life period is
constant, i.e., it is independent of initial concentration of the reacting
species. The half-life of a first order equation is readily calculated from
the rate constant and vice versa.
For zero order reaction t 1/2 ∝ [R] 0 . For first order reaction
t 1/2 is independent of [R] 0 .
A first order reaction is found to have a rate constant, k = 5.5 × 10 -14 s -1 .
Find the half-life of the reaction. Example 4.7
Half-life for a first order reaction is Solution
0.693
k
0.693
= 5.5 ×10 –14 s –1 = 1.26 × 10 13 s
t 1/ 2 =
t 1/ 2
Show that in a first order reaction, time required for completion of
99.9% is 10 times of half-life (t 1/2 ) of the reaction.
Example 4.8
When reaction is completed 99.9%, [R] n = [R] 0 – 0.999[R] 0
k =
=
[ R ] 0
2.303
log
t
[ R ]
Solution
[ R ] 0
2.303
2.303
log
log10 3
t
[ R ] 0 − 0.999 [ R ] 0 =
t
t = 6.909/k
For half-life of the reaction
t 1/2 = 0.693/k
t
t 1/ 2
=
6.909
k
×
= 10
k
0.693
Table 4.4 summarises the mathematical features of integrated laws of
zero and first order reactions.
Table 4.4: Integrated Rate Laws for the Reactions of Zero and First Order
Order Reaction
type Differential
rate law Integrated
rate law Straight
line plot Half-
life Units of k
0 R→P d[R]/dt = -k kt = [R] 0 -[R] [R] vs t [R] 0 /2k conc time -1
or mol L –1 s –1
1 R→P d[R]/dt = -k[R] [R] = [R] 0 e -kt
or kt =
ln{[R] 0 /[R]} ln[R] vs t ln 2/k time -1 or s –1
109 Chemical Kinetics4.4 Pseudo First
Order
Reaction
The order of a reaction is sometimes altered by conditions. Consider
a chemical reaction between two substances when one reactant is
present in large excess. During the hydrolysis of 0.01 mol of ethyl
acetate with 10 mol of water, amounts of the various constituents
at the beginning (t = 0) and completion (t) of the reaction are given
as under.
+
H

→
CH 3 COOC 2 H 5 + H 2 O
t = 0
t
0.01 mol
0 mol
CH 3 COOH
10 mol
9.9 mol
0 mol
0.01 mol
+
C 2 H 5 OH
0 mol
0.01 mol
The concentration of water does not get altered much during the
course of the reaction. So, in the rate equation
Rate = k ′ [CH 3 COOC 2 H 5 ] [H 2 O]
the term [H 2 O] can be taken as constant. The equation, thus, becomes
Rate = k [CH 3 COOC 2 H 5 ]
where k = k ′ [H 2 O]
and the reaction behaves as first order reaction. Such reactions are
called pseudo first order reactions.
Inversion of cane sugar is another pseudo first order reaction.
C 12 H 22 O 11
+
H 2 O
+
H

→
Cane sugar
C 6 H 12 O 6
Glucose
+
C 6 H 12 O 6
Fructose
Rate = k [C 12 H 22 O 11 ]
Example 4.9 Hydrolysis of methyl acetate in aqueous solution has been studied by
titrating the liberated acetic acid against sodium hydroxide. The
concentration of the ester at different times is given below.
t/min 0 30 60 90
C/mol L –1 0.8500 0.8004 0.7538 0.7096
Show that it follows a pseudo first order reaction, as the concentration
of water remains nearly constant (55 mol L –1 ), during the course of the
reaction. What is the value of k ′ in this equation?
Rate = k ′ [CH 3 COOCH 3 ][H 2 O]
Solution For pseudo first order reaction, the reaction should be first order with
respect to ester when [H 2 O] is constant. The rate constant k for pseudo
first order reaction is
k =
Chemistry 110
C
2.303
log 0
t
C
where k = k ' [ H 2 O ]From the above data we note
t/min C/ mol L –1 k ́/min –1
0 0.8500 –
30 0.8004 2.004 × 10 –3
60 0.7538 2.002 × 10 –3
90 0.7096 2.005 × 10 –3
It can be seen that k ́ [H 2 O] is constant and equal to 2.004 × 10 -3 min –1
and hence, it is pseudo first order reaction. We can now determine k from
k ́ [H 2 O] = 2.004 × 10 –3 min –1
k ́ [55 mol L –1 ] = 2.004 × 10 –3 min –1
k ́ = 3.64 × 10 –5 mol –1 L min –1
Intext Questions
4.5 A first order reaction has a rate constant 1.15 × 10 -3 s -1 . How long will 5 g
of this reactant take to reduce to 3 g?
4.6 Time required to decompose SO 2 Cl 2 to half of its initial amount is 60
minutes. If the decomposition is a first order reaction, calculate the rate
constant of the reaction.
4.5 Temperature
Dependence of
the Rate of a
Reaction
Most of the chemical reactions are accelerated by increase in temperature.
For example, in decomposition of N 2 O 5 , the time taken for half of the
original amount of material to decompose is 12 min at 50 o C, 5 h at
25 o C and 10 days at 0 o C. You also know that in a mixture of potassium
permanganate (KMnO 4 ) and oxalic acid (H 2 C 2 O 4 ), potassium
permanganate gets decolourised faster at a higher temperature than
that at a lower temperature.
It has been found that for a chemical reaction with rise in
temperature by 10°, the rate constant is nearly doubled.
The temperature dependence of the rate of a chemical reaction can
be accurately explained by Arrhenius equation (4.18). It was first
proposed by Dutch chemist, J.H. van’t Hoff but Swedish chemist,
Arrhenius provided its physical justification and interpretation.
k = A e -Ea /RT
(4.18)
where A is the Arrhenius factor or the frequency factor. It is also called
pre-exponential factor. It is a constant specific to a particular reaction.
R is gas constant and E a is activation energy measured in joules/mole
(J mol –1 ).
111 Chemical KineticsIt can be understood clearly using the following simple reaction
H 2 ( g ) + I 2 ( g ) → 2HI ( g )
According to Arrhenius, this reaction can take place only
when a molecule of hydrogen and a molecule of iodine collide
Intermediate
to form an unstable intermediate (Fig. 4.6). It exists for a very
Fig. 4.6: Formation of HI through short time and then breaks up to form two molecules of
hydrogen iodide.
the intermediate
The energy required to form this
intermediate,
called
activated
complex (C), is known as activation
energy (E a ). Fig. 4.7 is obtained by
plotting potential energy vs reaction
coordinate. Reaction coordinate
represents the profile of energy change
when reactants change into products.
Some energy is released when the
complex decomposes to form
products. So, the final enthalpy of the
reaction depends upon the nature of
reactants and products.
Fig. 4.7: Diagram showing plot of potential
energy vs reaction coordinate.
All the molecules in the reacting
species do not have the same kinetic
energy. Since it is difficult to predict
the behaviour of any one molecule with
precision, Ludwig Boltzmann and
James Clark Maxwell used statistics
to predict the behaviour of large
number of molecules. According to
them, the distribution of kinetic energy
may be described by plotting the
fraction of molecules (N E /N T ) with a
given kinetic energy (E) vs kinetic
Fig. 4.8: Distribution curve showing energies
energy (Fig. 4.8). Here, N E is the
among gaseous molecules
number of molecules with energy E
and N T is total number of molecules.
The peak of the curve corresponds
to the most probable kinetic energy,
i.e., kinetic energy of maximum
fraction of molecules. There are
decreasing number of molecules with
energies higher or lower than this
value. When the temperature is raised,
the maximum of the curve moves to
the higher energy value (Fig. 4.9) and
the curve broadens out, i.e., spreads
Fig. 4.9: Distribution curve showing temperature
to the right such that there is a greater
dependence of rate of a reaction
Chemistry 112proportion of molecules with much higher energies. The area under the
curve must be constant since total probability must be one at all times.
We can mark the position of E a on Maxwell Boltzmann distribution
curve (Fig. 4.9).
Increasing the temperature of the substance increases the fraction
of molecules, which collide with energies greater than E a . It is clear from
the diagram that in the curve at (t + 10), the area showing the fraction
of molecules having energy equal to or greater than activation energy
gets doubled leading to doubling the rate of a reaction.
In the Arrhenius equation (4.18) the factor e -Ea /RT corresponds to
the fraction of molecules that have kinetic energy greater than E a .
Taking natural logarithm of both sides of equation (4.18)
ln k = –
E a
+ ln A
RT
(4.19)
The plot of ln k vs 1/T gives a straight line according to the equation
(4.19) as shown in Fig. 4.10.
Thus, it has been found from Arrhenius equation (4.18) that
increasing the temperature or decreasing the activation energy will
result in an increase in the rate of the reaction and an exponential
increase in the rate constant.
E a
and intercept = ln A. So we can
In Fig. 4.10, slope = –
R
calculate E a and A using these values.
At temperature T 1 , equation (4.19) is
ln k 1 = –
E a
+ ln A
RT 1
(4.20)
At temperature T 2 , equation (4.19) is
E a
+ ln A
(4.21)
ln k 2 = –
RT 2
(since A is constant for a given reaction)
k 1 and k 2 are the values of rate constants at
temperatures T 1 and T 2 respectively.
Subtracting equation (4.20) from (4.21), we obtain
ln k 2 – ln k 1 =
ln
Fig. 4.10: A plot between ln k and 1/T
E a
E a
–
RT 1
RT 2
1 
k 2 E a  1
− 
=

k 1
R  T 1 T 2 
log 1 
E a
k 2
 1
− 
=

k 1 2.303 R  T 1 T 2 
log k 2
E a
 T 2 − T 1 
=
k 1 2.303R   T 1 T 2  
(4.22)
113 Chemical Kineticsconstants of a reaction at 500K and 700K are 0.02s –1 and
Example 4.10 The rate
–1
0.07s respectively. Calculate the values of E a and A.
Solution
log
log
k 2
k 1
=
E a
 T 2 − T 1 
2.303 R   T 1 T 2  
E a

  700 − 500 
0.07
=  2.303 × 8.314 J K − 1 mol − 1  

0.02

  700 × 500 
0.544 = E a × 5.714 × 10 -4 /19.15
E a = 0.544 × 19.15/5.714 × 10 –4 = 18230.8 J
Since
k = Ae -Ea/RT
0.02 = Ae -18230.8/8.314 × 500
A = 0.02/0.012 = 1.61
Example 4.11 The first order rate constant for the decomposition of ethyl iodide
by the reaction
C 2 H 5 I(g) → C 2 H 4 (g) + HI(g)
at 600K is 1.60 × 10 –5 s –1 . Its energy of activation is 209 kJ/mol.
Calculate the rate constant of the reaction at 700K.
Solution We know that
log k 2 – log k 1 = 1 
E a
 1
− 

2.303 R  T 1 T 2 
log k 2 = log k 1 + E a
2.303 R
1 
 1
 T − T 
 1
2 
= log ( 1.60 × 10 − 5 ) +
209000 J mol L − 1
2.303 × 8.314 J mol L − 1 K − 1
1 
 1
 600 K − 700 K 


log k 2 = – 4.796 + 2.599 = – 2.197
k 2 = 6.36 × 10 –3 s –1
4.5.1 Effect of
Catalyst
A catalyst is a substance which increases the rate of a reaction without
itself undergoing any permanent chemical change. For example, MnO 2
catalyses the following reaction so as to increase its rate considerably.
MnO2
2KClO 3 →
2 KCl + 3O 2
The word catalyst should not be used when the added substance
reduces the rate of raction. The substance is then called inhibitor. The
action of the catalyst can be explained by intermediate complex theory.
According to this theory, a catalyst participates in a chemical reaction by
forming temporary bonds with the reactants resulting in an intermediate
complex. This has a transitory existence and decomposes to yield products
and the catalyst.
Chemistry 114It is believed that the catalyst provides an
alternate pathway or reaction mechanism by
reducing the activation energy between
reactants and products and hence lowering
the potential energy barrier as shown in
Fig. 4.11.
It is clear from Arrhenius equation (4.18)
that lower the value of activation energy faster
will be the rate of a reaction.
A small amount of the catalyst can catalyse
Fig. 4.11: Effect of catalyst on activation energy
a large amount of reactants. A catalyst does
not alter Gibbs energy, ∆G of a reaction. It
catalyses the spontaneous reactions but does not catalyse non-
spontaneous reactions. It is also found that a catalyst does not change
the equilibrium constant of a reaction rather, it helps in attaining the
equilibrium faster, that is, it catalyses the forward as well as the backward
reactions to the same extent so that the equilibrium state remains same
but is reached earlier.
4.6 Collision
Theory of
Chemical
Reactions
Though Arrhenius equation is applicable under a wide range of
circumstances, collision theory, which was developed by Max Trautz
and William Lewis in 1916 -18, provides a greater insight into the
energetic and mechanistic aspects of reactions. It is based on kinetic
theory of gases. According to this theory, the reactant molecules are
assumed to be hard spheres and reaction is postulated to occur when
molecules collide with each other. The number of collisions per
second per unit volume of the reaction mixture is known as
collision frequency (Z). Another factor which affects the rate of chemical
reactions is activation energy (as we have already studied). For a
bimolecular elementary reaction
A + B → Products
rate of reaction can be expressed as
(4.23)
Rate = Z AB e − E a / RT
where Z AB represents the collision frequency of reactants, A and B
-Ea /RT
and e
represents the fraction of molecules with energies equal to
or greater than E a . Comparing (4.23) with Arrhenius equation, we can
say that A is related to collision frequency.
Equation (4.23) predicts the value of rate constants fairly
accurately for the reactions that involve atomic species or simple
molecules but for complex molecules significant deviations are
observed. The reason could be that all collisions do not lead to the
formation of products. The collisions in which molecules collide with
sufficient kinetic energy (called threshold energy*) and proper
orientation, so as to facilitate breaking of bonds between reacting
species and formation of new bonds to form products are called as
effective collisions.
* Threshold energy = Activation Energy + energy possessed by reacting species.
115 Chemical KineticsFor example, formation of
methanol
from
bromoethane
depends upon the orientation of
reactant molecules as shown in
Fig. 4.12. The proper orientation of
reactant molecules lead to bond
formation
whereas
improper
orientation makes them simply
bounce back and no products are
formed.
Fig. 4.12: Diagram showing molecules having proper and
To account for effective collisions,
improper orientation
another factor P, called the
probability or steric factor is
introduced. It takes into account the fact that in a collision, molecules
must be properly oriented i.e.,
Rate = P Z AB e − E a / RT
Thus, in collision theory activation energy and proper orientation of
the molecules together determine the criteria for an effective collision
and hence the rate of a chemical reaction.
Collision theory also has certain drawbacks as it considers atoms/
molecules to be hard spheres and ignores their structural aspect. You
will study details about this theory and more on other theories in your
higher classes.
Intext Questions
4.7
4.8
4.9
What will be the effect of temperature on rate constant ?
The rate of the chemical reaction doubles for an increase of 10K in absolute
temperature from 298K. Calculate E a .
The activation energy for the reaction
2 HI(g) → H 2 + I 2 (g)
is 209.5 kJ mol –1 at 581K.Calculate the fraction of molecules of reactants
having energy equal to or greater than activation energy?
Summary
Chemical kinetics is the study of chemical reactions with respect to reaction
rates, effect of various variables, rearrangement of atoms and formation of
intermediates. The rate of a reaction is concerned with decrease in concentration
of reactants or increase in the concentration of products per unit time. It can
be expressed as instantaneous rate at a particular instant of time and average
rate over a large interval of time. A number of factors such as temperature,
concentration of reactants, catalyst, affect the rate of a reaction. Mathematical
representation of rate of a reaction is given by rate law. It has to be determined
experimentally and cannot be predicted. Order of a reaction with respect to a
Chemistry 116reactant is the power of its concentration which appears in the rate law equation.
The order of a reaction is the sum of all such powers of concentration of terms
for different reactants. Rate constant is the proportionality factor in the rate law.
Rate constant and order of a reaction can be determined from rate law or its
integrated rate equation. Molecularity is defined only for an elementary reaction.
Its values are limited from 1 to 3 whereas order can be 0, 1, 2, 3 or even a
fraction. Molecularity and order of an elementary reaction are same.
Temperature dependence of rate constants is described by Arrhenius equation
(k = Ae –Ea/RT ). E a corresponds to the activation energy and is given by the energy
difference between activated complex and the reactant molecules, and A (Arrhenius
factor or pre-exponential factor) corresponds to the collision frequency. The
equation clearly shows that increase of temperature or lowering of E a will lead to
an increase in the rate of reaction and presence of a catalyst lowers the activation
energy by providing an alternate path for the reaction. According to collision
theory, another factor P called steric factor which refers to the orientation of
molecules which collide, is important and contributes to effective collisions, thus,
modifying the Arrhenius equation to k = P Z AB e − E a / RT .
Exercises
4.1
From the rate expression for the following reactions, determine their
order of reaction and the dimensions of the rate constants.
(i) 3NO(g)
→
N 2 O (g) Rate = k[NO] 2
(ii) H 2 O 2 (aq) + 3I – (aq) + 2H +
4.2
2H 2 O (l) + I − 3
→ CH 4 (g) + CO(g)
→ C 2 H 4 (g) + HCl (g)
(iii) CH 3 CHO (g)
(iv) C 2 H 5 Cl (g)
→
Rate = k[H 2 O 2 ][I - ]
Rate = k [CH 3 CHO] 3/2
Rate = k [C 2 H 5 Cl]
For the reaction:
2A + B → A 2 B
the rate = k[A][B] 2 with k = 2.0 × 10 –6 mol –2 L 2 s –1 . Calculate the initial
rate of the reaction when [A] = 0.1 mol L –1 , [B] = 0.2 mol L –1 . Calculate
the rate of reaction after [A] is reduced to 0.06 mol L –1 .
4.3 The decomposition of NH 3 on platinum surface is zero order reaction. What
are the rates of production of N 2 and H 2 if k = 2.5 × 10 –4 mol –1 L s –1 ?
4.4 The decomposition of dimethyl ether leads to the formation of CH 4 , H 2
and CO and the reaction rate is given by
Rate = k [CH 3 OCH 3 ] 3/2
The rate of reaction is followed by increase in pressure in a closed
vessel, so the rate can also be expressed in terms of the partial pressure
of dimethyl ether, i.e.,
Rate = k ( p CH 3 OCH 3 )
4.5
3/2
If the pressure is measured in bar and time in minutes, then what are
the units of rate and rate constants?
Mention the factors that affect the rate of a chemical reaction.
117 Chemical Kinetics4.6
4.7
4.8
A reaction is second order with respect to a reactant. How is the rate of
reaction affected if the concentration of the reactant is
(i) doubled
(ii) reduced to half ?
What is the effect of temperature on the rate constant of a reaction? How can
this effect of temperature on rate constant be represented quantitatively?
In a pseudo first order hydrolysis of ester in water, the following results were
obtained:
t/s
–1
[Ester]/mol L
4.9
4.10
60 90
0.55 0.31 0.17 0.085
A/ mol L –1 0.20
–1 0.30
–1 –1
r 0 /mol L s
0.20
0.40
0.10
–5
5.07 × 10
0.05
–5
5.07 × 10
1.43 × 10 –4
What is the order of the reaction with respect to A and B?
The following results have been obtained during the kinetic studies of the reaction:
2A + B
4.12
30
(i) Calculate the average rate of reaction between the time interval 30 to
60 seconds.
(ii) Calculate the pseudo first order rate constant for the hydrolysis of ester.
A reaction is first order in A and second order in B.
(i) Write the differential rate equation.
(ii) How is the rate affected on increasing the concentration of B three times?
(iii) How is the rate affected when the concentrations of both A and B are
doubled?
In a reaction between A and B, the initial rate of reaction (r 0 ) was measured
for different initial concentrations of A and B as given below:
B/ mol L
4.11
0
→
C + D
Experiment [A]/mol L –1 [B]/mol L –1 Initial rate of formation
of D/mol L –1 min –1
I 0.1 0.1 6.0 × 10 –3
II 0.3 0.2 7.2 × 10 –2
III 0.3 0.4 2.88 × 10 –1
IV 0.4 0.1 2.40 × 10 –2
Determine the rate law and the rate constant for the reaction.
The reaction between A and B is first order with respect to A and zero order
with respect to B. Fill in the blanks in the following table:
Chemistry 118
Experiment [A]/ mol L –1 [B]/ mol L –1 Initial rate/
mol L –1 min –1
I 0.1 0.1 2.0 × 10 –2
II – 0.2 4.0 × 10 –2
III 0.4 0.4 –
IV – 0.2 2.0 × 10 –24.13
4.14
4.15
Calculate the half-life of a first order reaction from their rate constants
given below:
(i) 200 s –1
(ii) 2 min –1
(iii) 4 years –1
14
The half-life for radioactive decay of C is 5730 years. An archaeological
artifact containing wood had only 80% of the 14 C found in a living tree.
Estimate the age of the sample.
The experimental data for decomposition of N 2 O 5
[2N 2 O 5
→
4NO 2 + O 2 ]
in gas phase at 318K are given below:
0
t/s
2
10 × [N 2 O 5 ]/ 1.63
mol L –1
4.16
4.17
4.18
4.19
4.20
4.21
400 800 1200 1600 2000 2400 2800 3200
1.36 1.14 0.93
0.78
0.64
0.53
0.43
0.35
(i) Plot [N 2 O 5 ] against t.
(ii) Find the half-life period for the reaction.
(iii) Draw a graph between log[N 2 O 5 ] and t.
(iv) What is the rate law ?
(v) Calculate the rate constant.
(vi) Calculate the half-life period from k and compare it with (ii).
The rate constant for a first order reaction is 60 s –1 . How much time will
it take to reduce the initial concentration of the reactant to its 1/16 th
value?
During nuclear explosion, one of the products is 90 Sr with half-life of
28.1 years. If 1 μ g of 90 Sr was absorbed in the bones of a newly born
baby instead of calcium, how much of it will remain after 10 years and
60 years if it is not lost metabolically.
For a first order reaction, show that time required for 99% completion
is twice the time required for the completion of 90% of reaction.
A first order reaction takes 40 min for 30% decomposition. Calculate t 1/2 .
For the decomposition of azoisopropane to hexane and nitrogen at 543
K, the following data are obtained.
t (sec) P(mm of Hg)
0 35.0
360 54.0
720 63.0
Calculate the rate constant.
The following data were obtained during the first order thermal
decomposition of SO 2 Cl 2 at a constant volume.
SO 2 Cl 2 ( g ) → SO 2 ( g ) + Cl 2 ( g )
Experiment Time/s –1 Total pressure/atm
1 0 0.5
2 100 0.6
Calculate the rate of the reaction when total pressure is 0.65 atm.
119 Chemical Kinetics4.22
The rate constant for the decomposition of N 2 O 5 at various temperatures
is given below:
T/°C
5
-1
10 × k/s
4.23
4.24
4.25
4.26
4.27
4.28
4.29
4.30
0 20 40 60 80
0.0787 1.70 25.7 178 2140
Draw a graph between ln k and 1/T and calculate the values of A and E a .
Predict the rate constant at 30° and 50°C.
The rate constant for the decomposition of hydrocarbons is 2.418 × 10 –5 s –1
at 546 K. If the energy of activation is 179.9 kJ/mol, what will be the value
of pre-exponential factor.
Consider a certain reaction A → Products with k = 2.0 × 10 –2 s –1 . Calculate
the concentration of A remaining after 100 s if the initial concentration
of A is 1.0 mol L –1 .
Sucrose decomposes in acid solution into glucose and fructose according
to the first order rate law, with t 1/2 = 3.00 hours. What fraction of sample
of sucrose remains after 8 hours ?
The decomposition of hydrocarbon follows the equation
k = (4.5 × 10 11 s –1 ) e -28000K/T
Calculate E a .
The rate constant for the first order decomposition of H 2 O 2 is given by the
following equation:
log k = 14.34 – 1.25 × 10 4 K/T
Calculate E a for this reaction and at what temperature will its half-period
be 256 minutes?
The decomposition of A into product has value of k as 4.5 × 10 3 s –1 at 10°C
and energy of activation 60 kJ mol –1 . At what temperature would k be
1.5 × 10 4 s –1 ?
The time required for 10% completion of a first order reaction at 298K is
equal to that required for its 25% completion at 308K. If the value of A is
4 × 10 10 s –1 . Calculate k at 318K and E a .
The rate of a reaction quadruples when the temperature changes from
293 K to 313 K. Calculate the energy of activation of the reaction assuming
that it does not change with temperature.
Answers to Some Intext Questions
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.8
4.9
r av = 6.66 × 10 Ms –1
Rate of reaction = rate of diappearance of A
= 0.005 mol litre –1 min –1
Order of the reaction is 2.5
X → Y
Rate = k[X] 2
The rate will increase 9 times
t = 444 s
1.925 × 10 –4 s –1
Ea = 52.897 kJ mol –1
1.471 × 10 –19
Chemistry 120
–6
Unit
5
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• describe interfacial phenomenon
and its significance;
• define adsorption and classify it
into physical and chemical
adsorption;
• explain mechanism of adsorption;
• explain the factors controlling
adsorption from gases and
solutions on solids;
• explain adsorption results on the
basis of Freundlich adsorption
isotherms;
• appreciate the role of catalysts in
industry;
• enumerate the nature of colloidal
state;
• describe preparation, properties
and purification of colloids;
• classify emulsions and describe
their preparation and properties;
• describe the phenomenon of gel
formation;
• list the uses of colloids.
Sur
face Chemistr
y
Surface
Chemistry
Some of the most important chemicals are produced industrially by
means of reactions that occur on the surfaces of solid catalysts.
Surface chemistry deals with phenomena that occur
at the surfaces or interfaces. The interface or surface
is represented by separating the bulk phases by a
hyphen or a slash. For example, the interface between
a solid and a gas may be represented by solid-gas
or solid/gas. Due to complete miscibility, there is no
interface between the gases. The bulk phases that
we come across in surface chemistry may be pure
compounds or solutions. The interface is normally a
few molecules thick but its area depends on the size
of the particles of bulk phases. Many important
phenomena, noticeable amongst these being
corrosion, electrode processes, heterogeneous
catalysis, dissolution and crystallisation occur at
interfaces. The subject of surface chemistry finds
many applications in industry, analytical work and
daily life situations.
To accomplish surface studies meticulously, it
becomes imperative to have a really clean surface.
Under very high vacuum of the order of 10 –8 to 10 –9
pascal, it is now possible to obtain ultra clean surface
of the metals. Solid materials with such clean
surfaces need to be stored in vacuum otherwise these
will be covered by molecules of the major components
of air namely dioxygen and dinitrogen.
In this Unit, you will be studying some important
features of surface chemistry such as adsorption,
catalysis and colloids including emulsions and gels.
2017-185.1 Adsorption
There are several examples, which reveal that the surface of a solid has the
tendency to attract and retain the molecules of the phase with which it
comes into contact. These molecules remain only at the surface and do
not go deeper into the bulk. The accumulation of molecular species
at the surface rather than in the bulk of a solid or liquid is termed
adsorption. The molecular species or substance, which concentrates or
accumulates at the surface is termed adsorbate and the material on the
surface of which the adsorption takes place is called adsorbent.
Adsorption is essentially a surface phenomenon. Solids, particularly
in finely divided state, have large surface area and therefore, charcoal,
silica gel, alumina gel, clay, colloids, metals in finely divided state, etc.
act as good adsorbents.
Adsorption in action
(i) If a gas like O 2 , H 2 , CO, Cl 2 , NH 3 or SO 2 is taken in a closed vessel
containing powdered charcoal, it is observed that the pressure of the
gas in the enclosed vessel decreases. The gas molecules concentrate
at the surface of the charcoal, i.e., gases are adsorbed at the surface.
(ii) In a solution of an organic dye, say methylene blue, when animal
charcoal is added and the solution is well shaken, it is observed
that the filtrate turns colourless. The molecules of the dye, thus,
accumulate on the surface of charcoal, i.e., are adsorbed.
(iii) Aqueous solution of raw sugar, when passed over beds of animal
charcoal, becomes colourless as the colouring substances are
adsorbed by the charcoal.
(iv) The air becomes dry in the presence of silica gel because the water
molecules get adsorbed on the surface of the gel.
It is clear from the above examples that solid surfaces can hold
the gas or liquid molecules by virtue of adsorption. The process of
removing an adsorbed substance from a surface on which it is
adsorbed is called desorption.
5.1.1 Distinction
between
Adsorption
and
Absorption In adsorption, the substance is concentrated only at the surface and
does not penetrate through the surface to the bulk of the adsorbent,
while in absorption, the substance is uniformly distributed throughout
the bulk of the solid. For example, when a chalk stick is dipped in ink,
the surface retains the colour of the ink due to adsorption of coloured
molecules while the solvent of the ink goes deeper into the stick due
to absorption. On breaking the chalk stick, it is found to be white from
inside. A distinction can be made between absorption and adsorption
by taking an example of water vapour. Water vapours are absorbed by
anhydrous calcium chloride but adsorbed by silica gel. In other words,
in adsorption the concentration of the adsorbate increases only at the
surface of the adsorbent, while in absorption the concentration is
uniform throughout the bulk of the solid.
Both adsorption and absorption can take place simultaneously
also. The term sorption is used to describe both the processes.
5.1.2 Mechanism
of
Adsorption Adsorption arises due to the fact that the surface particles of the adsorbent
are not in the same environment as the particles inside the bulk. Inside
the adsorbent all the forces acting between the particles are mutually
Chemistry 122
2017-18balanced but on the surface the particles are not surrounded by atoms
or molecules of their kind on all sides, and hence they possess unbalanced
or residual attractive forces. These forces of the adsorbent are responsible
for attracting the adsorbate particles on its surface.The extent of
adsorption increases with the increase of surface area per unit mass of
the adsorbent at a given temperature and pressure.
Another important factor featuring adsorption is the heat of
adsorption. During adsorption, there is always a decrease in residual
forces of the surface, i.e., there is decrease in surface energy which
appears as heat. Adsorption, therefore, is invariably an exothermic
process. In other words, ∆H of adsorption is always negative. When a
gas is adsorbed, the freedom of movement of its molecules become
restricted. This amounts to decrease in the entropy of the gas after
adsorption, i.e., ∆S is negative. Adsorption is thus accompanied by
decrease in enthalpy as well as decrease in entropy of the system. For
a process to be spontaneous, the thermodynamic requirement is that,
at constant temperature and pressure, ∆G must be negative, i.e., there
is a decrease in Gibbs energy. On the basis of equation, ∆G = ∆H – T∆S,
∆G can be negative if ∆H has sufficiently high negative value as – T∆S
is positive. Thus, in an adsorption process, which is spontaneous, a
combination of these two factors makes ∆G negative. As the adsorption
proceeds, ∆H becomes less and less negative ultimately ∆H becomes
equal to T∆S and ∆G becomes zero. At this state equilibrium is attained.
5.1.3 Types of
Adsorption
There are mainly two types of adsorption of gases on solids.
If accumulation of gas on the surface of a solid occurs on account of
weak van der Waals’ forces, the adsorption is termed as physical
adsorption or physisorption. When the gas molecules or atoms are
held to the solid surface by chemical bonds, the adsorption is termed
chemical adsorption or chemisorption. The chemical bonds may be
covalent or ionic in nature. Chemisorption involves a high energy of
activation and is, therefore, often referred to as activated adsorption.
Sometimes these two processes occur simultaneously and it is not
easy to ascertain the type of adsorption. A physical adsorption at low
temperature may pass into chemisorption as the temperature is
increased. For example, dihydrogen is first adsorbed on nickel by van
der Waals’ forces. Molecules of hydrogen then dissociate to form hydrogen
atoms which are held on the surface by chemisorption.
Some of the important characteristics of both types of adsorption
are described below:
Characteristics of physisorption
(i) Lack of specificity: A given surface of an adsorbent does not show any
preference for a particular gas as the van der Waals’ forces are universal.
(ii) Nature of adsorbate: The amount of gas adsorbed by a solid
depends on the nature of gas. In general, easily liquefiable gases
(i.e., with higher critical temperatures) are readily adsorbed as van
der Waals’ forces are stronger near the critical temperatures. Thus,
1g of activated charcoal adsorbs more sulphur dioxide (critical
temperature 630K), than methane (critical temperature 190K) which
is still more than 4.5 mL of dihydrogen (critical temperature 33K).
123 Surface Chemistry
2017-18(iii) Reversible nature: Physical adsorption of a gas by a solid is
generally reversible. Thus,
Solid + Gas l Gas/Solid + Heat
More of gas is adsorbed when pressure is increased as the
volume of the gas decreases (Le–Chateliers’s principle) and the
gas can be removed by decreasing pressure. Since the adsorption
process is exothermic, the physical adsorption occurs readily at
low temperature and decreases with increasing temperature
(Le-Chatelier’s principle).
(iv) Surface area of adsorbent: The extent of adsorption increases
with the increase of surface area of the adsorbent. Thus, finely
divided metals and porous substances having large surface areas
are good adsorbents.
(v) Enthalpy of adsorption: No doubt, physical adsorption is an
exothermic process but its enthalpy of adsorption is quite low (20–
40 kJ mol -1 ). This is because the attraction between gas molecules
and solid surface is only due to weak van der Waals’ forces.
Characteristics of chemisorption
(i) High specificity: Chemisorption is highly specific and it will
only occur if there is some possibility of chemical bonding
between adsorbent and adsorbate. For example, oxygen is
adsorbed on metals by virtue of oxide formation and hydrogen
is adsorbed by transition metals due to hydride formation.
(ii) Irreversibility: As chemisorption involves compound formation, it
is usually irreversible in nature. Chemisorption is also an
exothermic process but the process is very slow at low
temperatures on account of high energy of activation. Like most
chemical changes, adsorption often increases with rise of
temperature. Physisorption of a gas adsorbed at low temperature
may change into chemisorption at a high temperature. Usually
high pressure is also favourable for chemisorption.
(iii) Surface area: Like physical adsorption, chemisorption also
increases with increase of surface area of the adsorbent.
(iv) Enthalpy of adsorption: Enthalpy of chemisorption is high
(80-240 kJ mol -1 ) as it involves chemical bond formation.
Table 5.1: Comparison of Physisorption and Chemisorption
1.
2.
3.
4.
Physisorption
It arises because of van der
Waals’ forces.
It is not specific in nature.
It is reversible in nature.
It depends on the nature of
gas. More easily liquefiable
gases are adsorbed readily.
5. Enthalpy of adsorption is low
(20-40 kJ mol –1 )in this case.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Chemisorption
It is caused by chemical bond
formation.
It is highly specific in nature.
It is irreversible.
It also depends on the nature
of gas. Gases which can react
with the adsorbent show
chemisorption.
Enthalpy of adsorption is high
(80-240 kJ mol –1 ) in this case.
Chemistry 124
2017-185.1.4 Adsorption
Isotherms
x
m
p
6. Low temperature is favourable 6. High temperature is favourable
for adsorption. It decreases
with increase of temperature.
7. No appreciable activation
energy is needed.
8. It depends on the surface
area. It increases with an
increase of surface area.
9. It results into multimolecular
layers on adsorbent surface
under high pressure. for adsorption. It increases with
the increase of temperature.
7. High activation energy is
sometimes needed.
8. It also depends on the surface
area. It too increases with an
increase of surface area.
9. It results into unimolecular
layer.
The variation in the amount of gas adsorbed by the adsorbent with
pressure at constant temperature can be expressed by means of a
curve termed as adsorption isotherm.
Freundlich adsorption isotherm: Freundlich, in 1909, gave an
empirical relationship between the quantity of gas adsorbed by unit
mass of solid adsorbent and pressure at a particular temperature. The
relationship can be expressed by the following equation:
x
= k.p 1/n (n > 1)
... (5.1)
m
where x is the mass of the gas adsorbed on mass m of the
195 K
adsorbent at pressure P, k and n are constants which depend
on the nature of the adsorbent and the gas at a particular
temperature. The relationship is generally represented in the
form of a curve where mass of the gas adsorbed per gram of
244 K
the adsorbent is plotted against pressure (Fig. 5.1). These curves
indicate that at a fixed pressure, there is a decrease in physical
273 K
adsorption with increase in temperature. These curves always
seem to approach saturation at high pressure.
Taking logarithm of eq. (5.1)
Fig. 5.1: Adsorption isotherm
log
Fig. 5.2: Freundlich isotherm
x
1
= log k +
log p
... (5.2)
m
n
The validity of Freundlich isotherm can be
x
verified by plotting log
on y-axis (ordinate)
m
and log p on x-axis (abscissa). If it comes to be
a straight line, the Freundlich isotherm is valid,
otherwise not (Fig. 5.2). The slope of the
1
straight line gives the value of . The intercept
n
on the y-axis gives the value of log k.
Freundlich isotherm explains the behaviour
of adsorption in an approximate manner. The
1
factor
can have values between 0 and 1
n
(probable range 0.1 to 0.5). Thus, equation (5.2)
holds good over a limited range of pressure.
125 Surface Chemistry
2017-181
x
= 0,
= constant, the adsorption is independent of pressure.
n
m
1
x
x
= 1,
= k p, i.e.
∝ p, the adsorption varies directly
When
n
m
m
with pressure.
Both the conditions are supported by experimental results.
The experimental isotherms always seem to approach saturation at
high pressure. This cannot be explained by Freundlich isotherm. Thus,
it fails at high pressure.
When
5.1.5 Adsorption
from
Solution
Phase
Solids can adsorb solutes from solutions also. When a solution of
acetic acid in water is shaken with charcoal, a part of the acid is
adsorbed by the charcoal and the concentration of the acid decreases
in the solution. Similarly, the litmus solution when shaken with charcoal
becomes colourless. The precipitate of Mg(OH) 2 attains blue colour
when precipitated in presence of magneson reagent. The colour is due
to adsorption of magneson. The following observations have been made
in the case of adsorption from solution phase:
(i) The extent of adsorption decreases with an increase in temperature.
(ii) The extent of adsorption increases with an increase of surface area
of the adsorbent.
(iii) The extent of adsorption depends on the concentration of the solute
in solution.
(iv) The extent of adsorption depends on the nature of the adsorbent
and the adsorbate.
The precise mechanism of adsorption from solution is not known.
Freundlich’s equation approximately describes the behaviour of
adsorption from solution with a difference that instead of pressure,
concentration of the solution is taken into account, i.e.,
x
= k C 1/n
...(5.3)
m
(C is the equilibrium concentration, i.e., when adsorption is complete).
On taking logarithm of the above equation, we have
x
1
= logk +
logC
...(5.4)
m
n
x
Plotting log
against log C a straight line is obtained which
m
shows the validity of Freundlich isotherm. This can be tested
experimentally by taking solutions of different concentrations of acetic
acid. Equal volumes of solutions are added to equal amounts of
charcoal in different flasks. The final concentration is determined in
each flask after adsorption. The difference in the initial and final
concentrations give the value of x. Using the above equation, validity
of Freundlich isotherm can be established.
log
5.1.6 Applications
of
Adsorption
The phenomenon of adsorption finds a number of applications.
Important ones are listed here:
(i) Production of high vacuum: The remaining traces of air can be
adsorbed by charcoal from a vessel evacuated by a vacuum pump
to give a very high vacuum.
Chemistry 126
2017-18(ii) Gas masks: Gas mask (a device which consists of activated charcoal
or mixture of adsorbents) is usually used for breathing in coal
mines to adsorb poisonous gases.
(iii) Control of humidity: Silica and aluminium gels are used as
adsorbents for removing moisture and controlling humidity.
(iv) Removal of colouring matter from solutions: Animal charcoal
removes colours of solutions by adsorbing coloured impurities.
(v) Heterogeneous catalysis: Adsorption of reactants on the solid
surface of the catalysts increases the rate of reaction. There are
many gaseous reactions of industrial importance involving solid
catalysts. Manufacture of ammonia using iron as a catalyst,
manufacture of H 2 SO 4 by contact process and use of finely divided
nickel in the hydrogenation of oils are excellent examples of
heterogeneous catalysis.
(vi) Separation of inert gases: Due to the difference in degree of adsorption
of gases by charcoal, a mixture of noble gases can be separated by
adsorption on coconut charcoal at different temperatures.
(vii) In curing diseases: A number of drugs are used to kill germs by
getting adsorbed on them.
(viii) Froth floatation process: A low grade sulphide ore is concentrated
by separating it from silica and other earthy matter by this method
using pine oil and frothing agent (see Unit 6).
(ix) Adsorption indicators: Surfaces of certain precipitates such as
silver halides have the property of adsorbing some dyes like eosin,
fluorescein, etc. and thereby producing a characteristic colour at
the end point.
(x) Chromatographic analysis: Chromatographic analysis based on
the phenomenon of adsorption finds a number of applications in
analytical and industrial fields.
Intext Questions
5.1 Write any two characteristics of Chemisorption.
5.2 Why does physisorption decrease with the increase of temperature?
5.3 Why are powdered substances more effective adsorbents than their
crystalline forms?
5.2 Catalysis
Potassium chlorate, when heated strongly decomposes slowly giving
dioxygen. The decomposition occurs in the temperature range of
653-873K.
2KClO 3 → 2KCl + 3O 2
However, when a little of manganese dioxide is added, the
decomposition takes place at a considerably lower temperature range,
i.e., 473-633K and also at a much accelerated rate. The added
manganese dioxide remains unchanged with respect to its mass and
composition. In a similar manner, the rates of a number of chemical
reactions can be altered by the mere presence of a foreign substance.
127 Surface Chemistry
2017-18The systematic study of the effect of various foreign substances on the
rates of chemical reactions was first made by Berzelius, in 1835. He
suggested the term catalyst for such substances.
Substances, which accelerate the rate of a chemical reaction and
themselves remain chemically and quantitatively unchanged after the
reaction, are known as catalysts, and the phenomenon is known as
catalysis. You have already studied about catalysts and its functioning
in Section 4.5.
Promoters and poisons
Promoters are substances that enhance the activity of a catalyst while
poisons decrease the activity of a catalyst. For example, in Haber’s
process for manufacture of ammonia, molybdenum acts as a promoter
for iron which is used as a catalyst.
N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g)
5.2.1
Homogeneous and
Heterogeneous
Catalysis
Fe(s)
Mo(s)
2NH 3 (g)
Catalysis can be broadly divided into two groups:
(a) Homogeneous catalysis
When the reactants and the catalyst are in the same phase (i.e.,
liquid or gas), the process is said to be homogeneous catalysis. The
following are some of the examples of homogeneous catalysis:
(i) Oxidation of sulphur dioxide into sulphur trioxide with dioxygen
in the presence of oxides of nitrogen as the catalyst in the lead
chamber process.
NO(g)
2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g)
2SO 3 (g)
The reactants, sulphur dioxide and oxygen, and the catalyst,
nitric oxide, are all in the same phase.
(ii) Hydrolysis of methyl acetate is catalysed by H + ions furnished
by hydrochloric acid.
HCI(l)
CH 3 COOCH 3 (l) + H 2 O(l)
CH 3 COOH(aq) + CH 3 OH(aq)
Both the reactants and the catalyst are in the same phase.
(iii) Hydrolysis of sugar is catalysed by H + ions furnished by
sulphuric acid.
C 12 H 22 O 11 (aq) + H 2 O(l)
Solution
H 2 SO 4 (l)
C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) + C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq)
Glucose
Fructose
Solution
Both the reactants and the catalyst are in the same phase.
(b) Heterogeneous catalysis
The catalytic process in which the reactants and the catalyst are in
different phases is known as heterogeneous catalysis. Some of the
examples of heterogeneous catalysis are given below:
(i) Oxidation of sulphur dioxide into sulphur trioxide in the
presence of Pt.
Pt(s)
2SO 2 (g)
2SO 3 (g)
The reactant is in gaseous state while the catalyst is in the
solid state.
Chemistry 128
2017-18(ii) Combination between dinitrogen and dihydrogen to form
ammonia in the presence of finely divided iron in Haber’s process.
Fe(s)
N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g)
2NH 3 (g)
The reactants are in gaseous state while the catalyst is in the
solid state.
(iii) Oxidation of ammonia into nitric oxide in the presence of
platinum gauze in Ostwald’s process.
4NH 3 (g) + 5O 2 (g)
Pt(s)
4NO(g) + 6H 2 O(g)
The reactants are in gaseous state while the catalyst is in the
solid state.
(iv) Hydrogenation of vegetable oils in the presence of finely divided
nickel as catalyst.
Ni(s)
Vegetable oils(l) + H 2 (g)
Vegetable ghee(s)
One of the reactants is in liquid state and the other in gaseous
state while the catalyst is in the solid state.
5.2.2 Adsorption Theory
of Heterogeneous
Catalysis
This theory explains the mechanism of heterogeneous catalysis.
The old theory, known as adsorption theory of catalysis, was
that the reactants in gaseous state or in solutions, are adsorbed
on the surface of the solid catalyst. The increase in concentration
of the reactants on the surface increases the rate of reaction. Adsorption
being an exothermic process, the heat of adsorption is utilised in
enhancing the rate of the reaction.
The catalytic action can be explained in terms of the intermediate
compound formation, the theory of which you have already studied in
Section 4.5.1
The modern adsorption theory is the combination of intermediate
compound formation theory and the old adsorption theory. The catalytic
activity is localised on the surface of the catalyst. The mechanism involves
five steps:
(i) Diffusion of reactants to the surface of the catalyst.
(ii) Adsorption of reactant molecules on the surface of the catalyst.
(iii) Occurrence of chemical reaction on the catalyst’s surface through
formation of an intermediate (Fig. 5.3).
(iv) Desorption of reaction products from the catalyst surface, and thereby,
making the surface available again for more reaction to occur.
(v) Diffusion of reaction products away from the catalyst’s surface.
The surface of the catalyst unlike the inner part of the bulk, has
free valencies which provide the seat for chemical forces of
attraction. When a gas comes in contact with such a surface, its
molecules are held up there due to loose chemical combination. If
different molecules are adsorbed side by side, they may react with
each other resulting in the formation of new molecules. Thus,
formed molecules may evaporate leaving the surface for the fresh
reactant molecules.
This theory explains why the catalyst remains unchanged in mass
and chemical composition at the end of the reaction and is effective
129 Surface Chemistry
2017-18Adsorption of
reacting molecules
A
+ A +B
B
Reacting
molecules
Adsorption of
reacting molecules
Catalyst surface having
free valencies
Fig. 5.3
Adsorption of
reacting
molecules,
formation of
intermediate and
desorption of
products
Desorption of
product molecules
A
+ A –B
Product
B
Catalyst
Intermediate
even in small quantities. It however, does not explain the action of
catalytic promoters and catalytic poisons.
Important features of solid catalysts
(a) Activity
The activity of a catalyst depends upon the strength of chemisorption
to a large extent. The reactants must get adsorbed reasonably
strongly on to the catalyst to become active. However, they must
not get adsorbed so strongly that they are immobilised and other
reactants are left with no space on the catalyst’s surface for
adsorption. It has been found that for hydrogenation reaction, the
catalytic activity increases from Group 5 to Group 11 metals with
maximum activity being shown by groups 7-9 elements of the
periodic table (Class XI, Unit 3).
2H 2 (g) + O 2 (g)
Pt
2H 2 O(l)
(b) Selectivity
The selectivity of a catalyst is its ability to direct a reaction to yield
a particular product selectively, when under the same reaction
conditions many products are possible. Selectivity of different
catalysts for same reactants is different. For example, starting with
H 2 and CO, and using different catalysts, we get different products.
5.2.3 Shape-
Selective
Catalysis by
Zeolites
Thus, it can be inferred that the action of a catalyst is highly selective
in nature. As a result a substance which acts as a catalyst in one
reaction may fail to catalyse another reaction.
The catalytic reaction that depends upon the pore structure of the
catalyst and the size of the reactant and product molecules is called
shape-selective catalysis. Zeolites are good shape-selective catalysts
because of their honeycomb-like structures. They are microporous
Chemistry 130
2017-18aluminosilicates with three dimensional network of silicates in which
some silicon atoms are replaced by aluminium atoms giving
Al–O–Si framework. The reactions taking place in zeolites depend upon
the size and shape of reactant and product molecules as well as upon
the pores and cavities of the zeolites. They are found in nature as well
as synthesised for catalytic selectivity.
Zeolites are being very widely used as catalysts in petrochemical
industries for cracking of hydrocarbons and isomerisation. An important
zeolite catalyst used in the petroleum industry is ZSM-5. It converts
alcohols directly into gasoline (petrol) by dehydrating them to give a
mixture of hydrocarbons.
5.2.4 Enzyme
Catalysis
Enzymes are complex nitrogenous organic compounds which are
produced by living plants and animals. They are actually protein
molecules of high molecular mass and form colloidal solutions in water.
They are very effective catalysts; catalyse numerous reactions, especially
those connected with natural processes. Numerous reactions that occur
in the bodies of animals and plants to maintain the life process are
catalysed by enzymes. The enzymes are, thus, termed as biochemical
catalysts and the phenomenon is known as biochemical catalysis.
Many enzymes have been obtained in pure crystalline state from living
cells. However, the first enzyme was synthesised in the laboratory in 1969.
The following are some of the examples of enzyme-catalysed reactions:
(i) Inversion of cane sugar: The invertase enzyme converts cane sugar
into glucose and fructose.
(ii) Conversion of glucose into ethyl alcohol: The zymase enzyme
converts glucose into ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide.
C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq)
Glucose
Zymase
2C 2 H 5 OH(aq) + 2CO 2 (g)
Ethyl alcohol
(iii) Conversion of starch into maltose: The diastase enzyme converts
starch into maltose.
2(C 6 H 10 O 5 ) n (aq) + nH 2 O(l)
Diastase
Starch
nC 12 H 22 O 11 (aq)
Maltose
(iv) Conversion of maltose into glucose: The maltase enzyme converts
maltose into glucose.
C 12 H 22 O 11 (aq) + H 2 O(l)
Maltase
2C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq)
Maltose
Glucose
(v) Decomposition of urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide: The
enzyme urease catalyses this decomposition.
NH 2 CONH 2 (aq) + H 2 O(l)
Urease
2NH 3 (g) + CO 2 (g)
(vi) In stomach, the pepsin enzyme converts proteins into peptides
while in intestine, the pancreatic trypsin converts proteins into
amino acids by hydrolysis.
(vii) Conversion of milk into curd: It is an enzymatic reaction brought
about by lacto bacilli enzyme present in curd.
131 Surface Chemistry
2017-18Table 5.2 gives the summary of some important enzymatic reactions.
Table 5.2: Some Enzymatic Reactions
Enzyme
Source
Enzymatic reaction
Invertase Yeast Sucrose → Glucose and fructose
Zymase Yeast Glucose → Ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide
Diastase Malt Starch
Maltase Yeast Maltose → Glucose
Urease Soyabean Urea
Pepsin Stomach Proteins → Amino acids
→ Maltose
→ Ammonia and carbon dioxide
Characteristics of enzyme catalysis
Enzyme catalysis is unique in its efficiency and high degree of specificity.
The following characteristics are exhibited by enzyme catalysts:
(i) Most highly efficient: One molecule of an enzyme may transform
one million molecules of the reactant per minute.
(ii) Highly specific nature: Each enzyme is specific for a given reaction,
i.e., one catalyst cannot catalyse more than one reaction. For
example, the enzyme urease catalyses the hydrolysis of urea only.
It does not catalyse hydrolysis of any other amide.
(iii) Highly active under optimum temperature: The rate of an enzyme
reaction becomes maximum at a definite temperature, called the
optimum temperature. On either side of the optimum temperature,
the enzyme activity decreases. The optimum temperature range
for enzymatic activity is 298-310K. Human body temperature being
310 K is suited for enzyme-catalysed reactions.
(iv) Highly active under optimum pH: The rate of an enzyme-catalysed
reaction is maximum at a particular pH called optimum pH, which
is between pH values 5-7.
(v) Increasing activity in presence of activators and co-enzymes:
The enzymatic activity is increased in the presence of certain
substances, known as co-enzymes. It has been observed that when
a small non-protein (vitamin) is present along with an enzyme, the
catalytic activity is enhanced considerably.
Activators are generally metal ions such as Na + , Mn 2+ , Co 2+ , Cu 2+ ,
etc. These metal ions, when weakly bonded to enzyme molecules,
increase their catalytic activity. Amylase in presence of sodium
chloride i.e., Na + ions are catalytically very active.
(vi) Influence of inhibitors and poisons: Like ordinary catalysts, enzymes
are also inhibited or poisoned by the presence of certain substances.
The inhibitors or poisons interact with the active functional groups
on the enzyme surface and often reduce or completely destroy the
catalytic activity of the enzymes. The use of many drugs is related
to their action as enzyme inhibitors in the body.
Mechanism of enzyme catalysis
There are a number of cavities present on the surface of colloidal particles
of enzymes. These cavities are of characteristic shape and possess active
groups such as -NH 2 , -COOH, -SH, -OH, etc. These are actually the active
Chemistry 132
2017-18E + S
E – S
E + P
centres on the surface of
enzyme particles. The
Active site
molecules of the reactant
P
(substrate), which have
complementary
shape, fit
+
+
E
E
E
S
S
into these cavities just like
P
a key fits into a lock. On
account of the presence of
Products active groups, an activated
Substrate
Enzyme-Substrate Enzyme
Enzyme
complex is formed which
complex
(catalyst) (reactants)
then decomposes to yield
Fig. 5.4: Mechanism of enzyme catalysed reaction
the products.
Thus, the enzyme-catalysed reactions may be considered to proceed
in two steps.
Step 1: Binding of enzyme to substrate to form an activated complex.
E + S → ES ≠
Step 2: Decomposition of the activated complex to form product.
ES ≠ → E + P
5.2.5 Catalysts in
Industry
Some of the important technical catalytic processes are listed in
Table 5.3 to give an idea about the utility of catalysts in industries.
Table 5.3: Some Industrial Catalytic Processes
Process
Catalyst
1. Haber’s process for the manufacture of
ammonia
N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) → 2NH 3 (g) Finely divided iron, molybdenum as promoter;
conditions: 200 bar pressure and 723-773K temp-
erature. Now-a-days, a mixture of iron oxide,
potassium oxide and alumina is used.
2. Ostwald’s process for the manufacture
of nitric acid.
4NH 3 (g) + 5O 2 (g) → 4NO(g) + 6H 2 O(g)
2NO(g) + O 2 (g) → 2NO 2 (g)
4NO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(l) + O 2 (g) → 4HNO 3 (aq) Platinised asbestos;
temperature 573K.
3. Contact process for the manufacture
of sulphuric acid.
2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) → 2SO 3 (g)
SO 3 (g) + H 2 SO 4 (aq) → H 2 S 2 O 7 (l)
oleum
H 2 S 2 O 7 (l) + H 2 O(l) → 2H 2 SO 4 (aq) Platinised asbestos or vanadium pentoxide (V 2 O 5 );
temperature 673-723K.
Intext Questions
5.4 In Haber’s process, hydrogen is obtained by reacting methane with steam in
presence of NiO as catalyst. The process is known as steam reforming. Why is
it necessary to remove CO when ammonia is obtained by Haber’s process?
5.5 Why is the ester hydrolysis slow in the beginning and becomes faster after
sometime?
5.6 What is the role of desorption in the process of catalysis.
133 Surface Chemistry
2017-185.3 Colloids We have learnt in Unit 2 that solutions are homogeneous systems. We
also know that sand in water when stirred gives a suspension, which
slowly settles down with time. Between the two extremes of suspensions
and solutions we come across a large group of systems called colloidal
dispersions or simply colloids.
A colloid is a heterogeneous system in which one substance is
dispersed (dispersed phase) as very fine particles in another substance
called dispersion medium.
The essential difference between a solution and a colloid is that of
particle size. While in a solution, the constituent particles are ions or
small molecules, in a colloid, the dispersed phase may consist of
particles of a single macromolecule (such as protein or synthetic
polymer) or an aggregate of many atoms, ions or molecules. Colloidal
particles are larger than simple molecules but small enough to remain
suspended. Their range of diameters is between 1 and 1000 nm
(10 –9 to 10 –6 m).
Colloidal particles have an enormous surface area per unit mass as
a result of their small size. Consider a cube with 1 cm side. It has a
total surface area of 6 cm 2 . If it were divided equally into 10 12 cubes,
the cubes would be the size of large colloidal particles and have a total
surface area of 60,000 cm 2 or 6 m 2 . This enormous surface area leads
to some special properties of colloids to be discussed later in this Unit.
5.4 Classification
of Colloids Colloids are classified on the basis of the following criteria:
(i) Physical state of dispersed phase and dispersion medium
(ii) Nature of interaction between dispersed phase and dispersion
medium
(iii) Type of particles of the dispersed phase.
5.4.1
Classification
Based on Physical
State of Dispersed
Phase and
Dispersion
Medium Depending upon whether the dispersed phase and the dispersion
medium are solids, liquids or gases, eight types of colloidal systems
are possible. A gas mixed with another gas forms a homogeneous
mixture and hence is not a colloidal system. The examples of the
various types of colloids along with their typical names are listed
in Table 5.4.
Dispersed
phase
Table 5.4: Types of Colloidal Systems
Dispersion
medium
Type of
colloid
Examples
Solid Solid Solid sol Some coloured glasses and gem stones
Solid Liquid Sol Paints, cell fluids
Solid Gas Aerosol Smoke, dust
Liquid Solid Gel Cheese, jellies
Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, hair cream, butter
Liquid Gas Aerosol Fog, mist, cloud, insecticide sprays
Gas Solid Solid sol Pumice stone, foam rubber
Gas Liquid Foam Froth, whipped cream, soap lather
Chemistry 134
2017-18Many familiar commercial products and natural objects are colloids.
For example, whipped cream is a foam, which is a gas dispersed in a
liquid. Firefighting foams, used at emergency airplane landings are
also colloidal systems. Most biological fluids are aqueous sols (solids
dispersed in water). Within a typical cell, proteins and nucleic acids are
colloidal-sized particles dispersed in an aqueous solution of ions and
small molecules.
Out of the various types of colloids given in Table 5.4, the most
common are sols (solids in liquids), gels (liquids in solids) and
emulsions (liquids in liquids). However, in the present Unit, we shall
take up discussion of the ‘sols’ and ‘emulsions’ only. Further, it may
be mentioned that if the dispersion medium is water, the sol is called
aquasol or hydrosol and if the dispersion medium is alcohol, it is
called alcosol and so on.
5.4.2
Classification
Based on Nature
of Interaction
between Dispersed
Phase and
Dispersion
Medium Depending upon the nature of interaction between the dispersed phase
and the dispersion medium, colloidal sols are divided into two categories,
namely, lyophilic (solvent attracting) and lyophobic (solvent repelling).
If water is the dispersion medium, the terms used are hydrophilic and
hydrophobic.
(i) Lyophilic colloids: The word ‘lyophilic’ means liquid-loving. Colloidal
sols directly formed by mixing substances like gum, gelatine, starch,
rubber, etc., with a suitable liquid (the dispersion medium) are
called lyophilic sols. An important characteristic of these sols is
that if the dispersion medium is separated from the dispersed
phase (say by evaporation), the sol can be reconstituted by simply
remixing with the dispersion medium. That is why these sols are
also called reversible sols. Furthermore, these sols are quite stable
and cannot be easily coagulated as discussed later.
(ii) Lyophobic colloids: The word ‘lyophobic’ means liquid-hating.
Substances like metals, their sulphides, etc., when simply mixed
with the dispersion medium do not form the colloidal sol. Their
colloidal sols can be prepared only by special methods (as discussed
later). Such sols are called lyophobic sols. These sols are readily
precipitated (or coagulated) on the addition of small amounts of
electrolytes, by heating or by shaking and hence, are not stable.
Further, once precipitated, they do not give back the colloidal sol
by simple addition of the dispersion medium. Hence, these sols
are also called irreversible sols. Lyophobic sols need stabilising
agents for their preservation.
5.4.3
Classification
Based on Type of
Particles of the
Dispersed Phase,
Multimolecular,
Macromolecular
and Associated
Colloids Depending upon the type of the particles of the dispersed phase, colloids
are classified as: multimolecular, macromolecular and associated colloids.
(i) Multimolecular colloids: On dissolution, a large number of atoms
or smaller molecules of a substance aggregate together to form
species having size in the colloidal range (1–1000 nm). The species
thus formed are called multimolecular colloids. For example, a
gold sol may contain particles of various sizes having many atoms.
Sulphur sol consists of particles containing a thousand or more of
S 8 sulphur molecules.
135 Surface Chemistry
2017-18(ii) Macromolecular colloids: Macromolecules (Unit 15) in suitable
solvents form solutions in which the size of the macromolecules
may be in the colloidal range. Such systems are called
macromolecular colloids. These colloids are quite stable and
resemble true solutions in many respects. Examples of naturally
occurring macromolecules are starch, cellulose, proteins and
enzymes; and those of man-made macromolecules are polythene,
nylon, polystyrene, synthetic rubber, etc.
(iii) Associated colloids (Micelles): There are some substances which
at low concentrations behave as normal strong electrolytes, but at
higher concentrations exhibit colloidal behaviour due to the
formation of aggregates. The aggregated particles thus formed are
called micelles. These are also known as associated colloids.
The formation of micelles takes place only above a particular
temperature called Kraft temperature (T k ) and above a particular
concentration called critical micelle concentration (CMC). On
dilution, these colloids revert back to individual ions. Surface active
agents such as soaps and synthetic detergents belong to this class.
For soaps, the CMC is 10 –4 to 10 –3 mol L –1 . These colloids have
both lyophobic and lyophilic parts. Micelles may contain as many
as 100 molecules or more.
Mechanism of micelle formation
Let us take the example of soap solutions. Soap is sodium or potassium
salt of a higher fatty acid and may be represented as RCOO – Na + (e.g.,
sodium stearate CH 3 (CH 2 ) 16 COO – Na + , which is a major component of
many bar soaps). When dissolved in water, it dissociates into RCOO –
and Na + ions. The RCOO – ions, however, consist of two parts — a long
hydrocarbon chain R (also called non-polar ‘tail’) which is hydrophobic
(water repelling), and a polar group COO – (also called polar-ionic ‘head’),
which is hydrophilic (water loving).
Fig. 5.5: Hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts of stearate ion
Chemistry 136
2017-18The RCOO – ions are, therefore,
present on the surface with their COO –
O
O
C
groups in water and the hydrocarbon
COO
Stearate
chains R staying away from it and
ion
OOC
remain at the surface. But at critical
COO
micelle concentration, the anions are
Water
C
pulled into the bulk of the solution and
O
O
aggregate to form a spherical shape
with their hydrocarbon chains pointing
(b)
towards the centre of the sphere with
(a)
–
Fig. 5.6: (a) Arrangement of stearate ions on the surface COO part remaining outward on the
surface of the sphere. An aggregate
of water at low concentrations of soap
(b) Arrangement of stearate ions inside the bulk thus formed is known as ‘ionic
of water (ionic micelle) at critical micelle micelle’. These micelles may contain
as many as 100 such ions.
concentrations of soap
Similarly, in case of detergents,
e.g., sodium laurylsulphate, CH 3 (CH 2 ) 11 SO 4– Na + , the polar group is
–SO 4– along with the long hydrocarbon chain. Hence, the mechanism of
micelle formation here also is same as that of soaps.
Ionic
micelle
Cleansing action of soaps
It has been mentioned earlier that a micelle consists of a hydrophobic
hydrocarbon – like central core. The cleansing action of soap is due to the
fact that soap molecules form micelle around
the oil droplet in such a way that hydrophobic
part of the stearate ions is in the oil droplet and
hydrophilic part projects out of the grease
droplet like the bristles (Fig. 5.7). Since the polar
(a)
groups can interact with water, the oil droplet
(b)
surrounded by stearate ions is now pulled in
(c)
water and removed from the dirty surface. Thus
Fig. 5.7: (a) Grease on cloth (b) Stearate ions soap helps in emulsification and washing away
arranging around the grease droplet and
of oils and fats. The negatively charged sheath
(c) Grease droplet surrounded by
around the globules prevents them from coming
stearate ions (micelle formed)
together and forming aggregates.
5.4.4 Preparation
of Colloids
A few important methods for the preparation of colloids are as follows:
(a) Chemical methods
Colloidal dispersions can be prepared by chemical reactions leading
to formation of molecules by double decomposition, oxidation,
reduction or hydrolysis. These molecules then aggregate leading to
formation of sols.
Double decompostion
→ As 2 S 3 (sol) + 3H 2 O
As 2 O 3 + 3H 2 S 
Oxidation
→ 3S(sol) + 2H 2 O
SO 2 + 2H 2 S 
Reduction
→ 2Au(sol) + 3HCOOH + 6HCl
2 AuCl 3 + 3 HCHO + 3H 2 O 
Hydrolysis
→ Fe(OH) 3 (sol) + 3HCl
FeCl 3 + 3H 2 O 
(b) Electrical disintegration or Bredig’s Arc method
This process involves dispersion as well as condensation. Colloidal
sols of metals such as gold, silver, platinum, etc., can be prepared
137 Surface Chemistry
2017-18by this method. In this method, electric arc is struck between
electrodes of the metal immersed in the dispersion medium
(Fig. 5.8). The intense heat produced vapourises the metal,
which then condenses to form particles of colloidal size.
(c) Peptization
Peptization may be defined as the process of
converting a precipitate into colloidal sol by
shaking it with dispersion medium in the presence
Ice-bath
of a small amount of electrolyte. The electrolyte
used for this purpose is called peptizing agent.
This method is applied, generally, to convert a
Fig. 5.8: Bredig’s Arc method
freshly prepared precipitate into a colloidal sol.
During peptization, the precipitate adsorbs one of the ions of the
electrolyte on its surface. This causes the development of positive or
negative charge on precipitates, which ultimately break up into smaller
particles of the size of a colloid.
medium
5.4.5 Purification
of Colloidal
Solutions
Colloidal solutions when prepared, generally contain excessive amount
of electrolytes and some other soluble impurities. While the presence of
traces of electrolyte is essential for the stability of the colloidal solution,
larger quantities coagulate it. It is, therefore, necessary to reduce the
concentration of these soluble impurities to a requisite minimum. The
process used for reducing the amount of impurities to a requisite
minimum is known as purification of colloidal solution. The
purification of colloidal solution is carried out by the following mehods:
(i) Dialysis: It is a process of removing a dissolved
substance from a colloidal solution by means
of diffusion through a suitable membrane.
Since particles (ions or smaller molecules) in a
true solution can pass through animal
membrane (bladder) or parchment paper or
cellophane sheet but not the colloidal particles,
the membrane can be used for dialysis. The
apparatus used for this purpose is called dialyser.
A bag of suitable membrane containing the colloidal
Fig. 5.9: Dialysis
solution is suspended in a vessel through which fresh water
is continuously flowing (Fig. 5.9). The molecules and ions diffuse through
membrane into the outer water and pure colloidal solution is left behind.
(ii) Electro-dialysis: Ordinarily, the process of
dialysis is quite slow. It can be made faster
by applying an electric field if the dissolved
substance in the impure colloidal solution
is only an electrolyte. The process is then
named electrodialysis. The colloidal
solution is placed in a bag of suitable
membrane while pure water is taken outside.
Electrodes are fitted in the compartment as shown in
Fig. 5.10. The ions present in the colloidal solution
migrate out to the oppositely charged electrodes.
Fig. 5.10: Electro-dialysis
Chemistry 138
2017-18(iii) Ultrafiltration: Ultrafiltration is the process of separating the
colloidal particles from the solvent and soluble solutes present in
the colloidal solution by specially prepared filters, which are
permeable to all substances except the colloidal particles. Colloidal
particles can pass through ordinary filter paper because the pores
are too large. However, the pores of filter paper can be reduced in
size by impregnating with collodion solution to stop the flow of
colloidal particles. The usual collodion is a 4% solution of nitro-
cellulose in a mixture of alcohol and ether. An ultra-filter paper
may be prepared by soaking the filter paper in a collodion solution,
hardening by formaldehyde and then finally drying it. Thus, by
using ultra-filter paper, the colloidal particles are separated from
rest of the materials. Ultrafiltration is a slow process. To speed up
the process, pressure or suction is applied. The colloidal particles
left on the ultra-filter paper are then stirred with fresh dispersion
medium (solvent) to get a pure colloidal solution.
5.4.6 Properties
of Colloidal
Solutions
Various properties exhibited by the colloidal solutions are described below:
(i) Colligative properties: Colloidal particles being bigger aggregates,
the number of particles in a colloidal solution is comparatively
small as compared to a true solution. Hence, the values of colligative
properties (osmotic pressure, lowering in vapour pressure,
depression in freezing point and elevation in boiling point) are of
small order as compared to values shown by true solutions at
same concentrations.
(ii) Tyndall effect: If a homogeneous solution placed
Eye
in dark is observed in the direction of light, it
appears clear and, if it is observed from a direction
at right angles to the direction of light beam, it
appears perfectly dark. Colloidal solutions viewed
Microscope
in the same way may also appear reasonably
clear or translucent by the transmitted light but
Tyndall cone
Scattered light they show a mild to strong opalescence, when
Light
viewed at right angles to the passage of light, i.e.,
source
the path of the beam is illuminated by a bluish
light. This effect was first observed by Faraday
and later studied in detail by Tyndall and is
termed as Tyndall effect. The bright cone of the
light is called Tyndall cone (Fig. 5.11). The Tyndall effect
Colloidal solution
is due to the fact that colloidal particles scatter light in all
Fig. 5.11: Tyndall effect
directions in space. This scattering of light illuminates
the path of beam in the colloidal dispersion.
Tyndall effect can be observed during the projection of picture in
the cinema hall due to scattering of light by dust and smoke particles
present there. Tyndall effect is observed only when the following two
conditions are satisfied.
(i) The diameter of the dispersed particles is not much smaller than
the wavelength of the light used; and
(ii) The refractive indices of the dispersed phase and the dispersion
medium differ greatly in magnitude.
139 Surface Chemistry
2017-18Tyndall effect is used to distinguish between a colloidal and true
solution. Zsigmondy, in 1903, used Tyndall effect to set up an
apparatus known as ultramicroscope. An intense beam of light is
focussed on the colloidal solution contained in a glass vessel. The
focus of the light is then observed with a microscope at right angles to
the beam. Individual colloidal particles appear as bright stars against
a dark background. Ultramicroscope does not render the actual colloidal
particles visible but only observe the light scattered by them. Thus,
ultramicroscope does not provide any information about the size and
shape of colloidal particles.
(iii) Colour: The colour of colloidal solution depends on the wavelength
of light scattered by the dispersed particles. The wavelength of light
further depends on the size and nature of the particles. The colour
of colloidal solution also changes with the manner in which the
observer receives the light. For example, a mixture of milk and water
appears blue when viewed by the reflected light and red when viewed
by the transmitted light. Finest gold sol is red in colour; as the size
of particles increases, it appears purple, then blue and finally golden.
(iv) Brownian movement: When colloidal solutions are viewed under
a powerful ultramicroscope, the colloidal particles appear to be in
a state of continuous zig-zag motion all over the field of
view. This motion was first observed by the British botanist,
Robert Brown, and is known as Brownian movement
(Fig. 5.12). This motion is independent of the nature of the
colloid but depends on the size of the particles and viscosity
of the solution. Smaller the size and lesser the viscosity,
faster is the motion.
The Brownian movement has been explained to be due
to the unbalanced bombardment of the particles by the
molecules of the dispersion medium. The Brownian
Fig. 5.12: Brownian movement
movement has a stirring effect which does not permit the
particles to settle and thus, is responsible for the stability of sols.
(v) Charge on colloidal particles: Colloidal particles always carry
an electric charge. The nature of this charge is the same on all
the particles in a given colloidal solution and may be either
positive or negative. A list of some common sols with the nature
of charge on their particles is given below:
Positively charged sols
Negatively charged sols
Hydrated metallic oxides,
e.g., Al 2 O 3 .xH 2 O, CrO 3 .xH 2 O and
Fe 2 O 3 .xH 2 O, etc. Metals, e.g., copper, silver,
gold sols.
Basic dye stuffs, e.g.,
methylene blue sol. Metallic sulphides, e.g., As 2 S 3 ,
Sb 2 S 3 , CdS sols.
Haemoglobin (blood) Acid dye stuffs, e.g., eosin,
congo red sols.
Oxides, e.g., TiO 2 sol. Sols of starch, gum, gelatin,
clay, charcoal, etc.
Chemistry 140
2017-18The charge on the sol particles is due to one or more reasons, viz.,
due to electron capture by sol particles during electrodispersion of
metals, due to preferential adsorption of ions from solution and/or due
to formulation of electrical double layer.
Preferential adsorption of ions is the most accepted reason. The sol
particles acquire positive or negative charge by preferential adsorption
of positive or negative ions. When two or more ions are present in the
dispersion medium, preferential adsorption of the ion common to the
colloidal particle usually takes place. This can be explained by taking
the following examples:
(a) When silver nitrate solution is added to potassium iodide solution,
the precipitated silver iodide adsorbs iodide ions from the dispersion
medium and negatively charged colloidal sol results. However, when
KI solution is added to AgNO 3 solution, positively charged sol results
due to adsorption of Ag + ions from dispersion medium.
AgI/I –
AgI/Ag +
Negatively charged
Positively charged
(b) If FeCl 3 is added to excess of hot water, a positively charged sol of
hydrated ferric oxide is formed due to adsorption of Fe 3+ ions. However,
when ferric chloride is added to NaOH a negatively charged sol is
obtained with adsorption of OH - ions.
Fe 2 O 3 .xH 2 O/Fe 3+
Fe 2 O 3 .xH 2 O/OH –
Positively charged Negatively charged
Having acquired a positive or a negative charge by selective adsorption
on the surface of a colloidal particle as stated above, this layer attracts
counter ions from the medium forming a second layer, as shown below.
AgI/I - K +
AgI/Ag + I -
The combination of the two layers of opposite charges around the
colloidal particle is called Helmholtz electrical double layer. According
to modern views, the first layer of ions is firmly held and is termed fixed
layer while the second layer is mobile which is termed diffused layer.
Since separation of charge is a seat of potential, the charges of opposite
signs on the fixed and diffused parts of the double layer results in a
difference in potential between these layers. This potential difference
between the fixed layer and the diffused layer of opposite charges is
called the electrokinetic potential or zeta potential.
The presence of equal and similar charges on colloidal particles is
largely responsible in providing stability to the colloidal solution,
because the repulsive forces between charged particles having same
charge prevent them from coalescing or aggregating when they come
closer to one another.
(vi) Electrophoresis: The existence of charge on colloidal particles is
confirmed by electrophoresis experiment. When electric potential
is applied across two platinum electrodes dipping in a colloidal
solution, the colloidal particles move towards one or the other
electrode. The movement of colloidal particles under an applied
electric potential is called electrophoresis. Positively charged
particles move towards the cathode while negatively charged
141 Surface Chemistry
2017-18particles move towards the anode. This can be
demonstrated by the following experimental set-
up (Fig. 5.13).
When electrophoresis, i.e., movement of particles is
prevented by some suitable means, it is observed that
the dispersion medium begins to move in an electric
field. This phenomenon is termed electroosmosis.
(vii) Coagulation or precipitation: The stability of
the lyophobic sols is due to the presence of charge
on colloidal particles. If, somehow, the charge is
removed, the particles will come nearer to each other
to form aggregates (or coagulate) and settle down
under the force of gravity.
The process of settling of colloidal particles is
called coagulation or precipitation of the sol.
Fig. 5.13: Electrophoresis
The coagulation of the lyophobic sols can be
carried out in the following ways:
(i) By electrophoresis: The colloidal particles move towards oppositely
charged electrodes, get discharged and precipitated.
(ii) By mixing two oppositely charged sols: Oppositely charged sols when
mixed in almost equal proportions, neutralise their charges and get
partially or completely precipitated. Mixing of hydrated ferric oxide
(+ve sol) and arsenious sulphide (–ve sol) bring them in the precipitated
forms. This type of coagulation is called mutual coagulation.
(iii) By boiling: When a sol is boiled, the adsorbed layer is disturbed
due to increased collisions with the molecules of dispersion
medium. This reduces the charge on the particles and ultimately
leads to settling down in the form of a precipitate.
(iv) By persistent dialysis: On prolonged dialysis, traces of the
electrolyte present in the sol are removed almost completely and
the colloids become unstable and ultimately coagulate.
(v) By addition of electrolytes: When excess of an electrolyte is added,
the colloidal particles are precipitated. The reason is that colloids
interact with ions carrying charge opposite to that present on
themselves. This causes neutralisation leading to their coagulation.
The ion responsible for neutralisation of charge on the particles is
called the coagulating ion. A negative ion causes the precipitation
of positively charged sol and vice versa.
It has been observed that, generally, the greater the valence of the
flocculating ion added, the greater is its power to cause precipitation.
This is known as Hardy-Schulze rule. In the coagulation of a negative
sol, the flocculating power is in the order: Al 3+ >Ba 2+ >Na +
Similarly, in the coagulation of a positive sol, the flocculating power
is in the order: [Fe(CN) 6 ] 4– > PO 43– > SO 42– > Cl –
The minimum concentration of an electrolyte in millimoles per litre
required to cause precipitation of a sol in two hours is called coagulating
value. The smaller the quantity needed, the higher will be the coagulating
power of an ion.
Chemistry 142
2017-18Coagulation of lyophilic sols
There are two factors which are responsible for the stability of lyophilic
sols. These factors are the charge and solvation of the colloidal particles.
When these two factors are removed, a lyophilic sol can be coagulated.
This is done (i) by adding an electrolyte and (ii) by adding a suitable
solvent. When solvents such as alcohol and acetone are added to
hydrophilic sols, the dehydration of dispersed phase occurs. Under this
condition, a small quantity of electrolyte can bring about coagulation.
Protection of colloids
Lyophilic sols are more stable than lyophobic sols. This is due to the
fact that lyophilic colloids are extensively solvated, i.e., colloidal particles
are covered by a sheath of the liquid in which they are dispersed.
Lyophilic colloids have a unique property of protecting lyophobic
colloids. When a lyophilic sol is added to the lyophobic sol, the lyophilic
particles form a layer around lyophobic particles and thus protect the
latter from electrolytes. Lyophilic colloids used for this purpose are
called protective colloids.
5.5 Emulsions
These are liquid-liquid colloidal systems, i.e., the dispersion of finely
divided droplets in another liquid. If a mixture of two immiscible or
partially miscible liquids is shaken, a coarse dispersion of one liquid
in the other is obtained which is called
Oil
Water
emulsion. Generally, one of the two liquids
is water. There are two types of emulsions.
(i) Oil dispersed in water (O/W type) and
(ii) Water dispersed in oil (W/O type).
In the first system, water acts as
dispersion medium. Examples of this type of
Oil in water
Water in oil
emulsion are milk and vanishing cream. In
Fig. 5.14: Types of emulsions
milk, liquid fat is dispersed in water. In the
second system, oil acts as dispersion medium. Common examples of
this type are butter and cream.
Emulsions of oil in water are unstable and sometimes they separate
into two layers on standing. For stabilisation of an emulsion, a third
component called emulsifying agent is usually added. The emulsifying
agent forms an interfacial film between suspended particles and the
medium. The principal emulsifying agents for O/W emulsions are
proteins, gums, natural and synthetic soaps, etc., and for W/O, heavy
metal salts of fatty acids, long chain alcohols, lampblack, etc.
Emulsions can be diluted with any amount of the dispersion
medium. On the other hand, the dispersed liquid when mixed, forms
a separate layer. The droplets in emulsions are often negatively charged
and can be precipitated by electrolytes. They also show Brownian
movement and Tyndall effect. Emulsions can be broken into constituent
liquids by heating, freezing, centrifuging, etc.
5.6 Colloids
Around Us
Most of the substances, we come across in our daily life, are colloids. The
meals we eat, the clothes we wear, the wooden furniture we use, the
houses we live in, the newspapers we read, are largely composed of colloids.
143 Surface Chemistry
2017-18Following are the interesting and noteworthy examples of colloids:
(i) Blue colour of the sky: Dust particles along with water suspended in air
scatter blue light which reaches our eyes and the sky looks blue to us.
(ii) Fog, mist and rain: When a large mass of air containing dust
particles, is cooled below its dewpoint, the moisture from the air
condenses on the surfaces of these particles forming fine droplets.
These droplets being colloidal in nature continue to float in air in
the form of mist or fog. Clouds are aerosols having small droplets
of water suspended in air. On account of condensation in the
upper atmosphere, the colloidal droplets of water grow bigger and
bigger in size, till they come down in the form of rain. Sometimes,
the rainfall occurs when two oppositely charged clouds meet.
It is possible to cause artificial rain by throwing electrified
sand or spraying a sol carrying charge opposite to the one on
clouds from an aeroplane.
(iii) Food articles: Milk, butter, halwa, ice creams, fruit juices, etc., are
all colloids in one form or the other.
(iv) Blood: It is a colloidal solution of an albuminoid substance. The
styptic action of alum and ferric chloride solution is due to
coagulation of blood forming a clot which stops further bleeding.
(v) Soils: Fertile soils are colloidal in nature in which humus acts as
a protective colloid. On account of colloidal nature, soils adsorb
moisture and nourishing materials.
(vi) Formation of delta: River water is a colloidal solution of clay. Sea
water contains a number of electrolytes. When river water meets the
sea water, the electrolytes present in sea water coagulate the colloidal
solution of clay resulting in its deposition with the formation of delta.
Applications of colloids
Colloids are widely used in the industry. Following are some examples:
(i) Electrical precipitation of smoke: Smoke is a colloidal solution of
solid particles such as carbon, arsenic compounds, dust, etc., in
air. The smoke, before it comes out from the chimney, is led through
a chamber containing plates having a charge opposite to that carried
by smoke particles. The particles on coming in contact with these
plates lose their charge and get precipitated. The particles thus
settle down on the floor of the chamber. The precipitator is called
High voltage
Cottrell precipitator (Fig.5.15).
electrode
(ii) Purification of drinking water: The water obtained from
(30000 volts
Gases
natural sources often contains suspended impurities.
or more)
free
Alum is added to such water to coagulate the suspended
from
impurities and make water fit for drinking purposes.
carbon
particles
(iii) Medicines: Most of the medicines are colloidal in nature.
For example, argyrol is a silver sol used as an eye lotion.
Colloidal antimony is used in curing kalaazar. Colloidal
Smoke
gold is used for intramuscular injection. Milk of
Precipitated
magnesia, an emulsion, is used for stomach disorders.
ash
Colloidal medicines are more effective because they have
Fig. 5.15: Cottrell smoke precipitator
large surface area and are therefore easily assimilated.
Chemistry 144
2017-18(iv) Tanning: Animal hides are colloidal in nature. When a hide, which
has positively charged particles, is soaked in tannin, which contains
negatively charged colloidal particles, mutual coagulation takes
place. This results in the hardening of leather. This process is
termed as tanning. Chromium salts are also used in place of tannin.
(v) Cleansing action of soaps and detergents: This has already been
described in Section 5.4.3.
(vi) Photographic plates and films: Photographic plates or films are
prepared by coating an emulsion of the light sensitive silver bromide
in gelatin over glass plates or celluloid films.
(vii) Rubber industry: Latex is a colloidal solution of rubber particles which
are negatively charged. Rubber is obtained by coagulation of latex.
(viii) Industrial products: Paints, inks, synthetic plastics, rubber,
graphite lubricants, cement, etc., are all colloidal solutions.
Intext Questions
5.7 What modification can you suggest in the Hardy Schulze law?
5.8 Why is it essential to wash the precipitate with water before estimating it
quantitatively?
Summary
Adsorption is the phenomenon of attracting and retaining the molecules of a
substance on the surface of a solid resulting into a higher concentration on the
surface than in the bulk. The substance adsorbed is known as adsorbate and the
substance on which adsorption takes place is called adsorbent. In physisorption,
adsorbate is held to the adsorbent by weak van der Waals forces, and in
chemisorption, adsorbate is held to the adsorbent by strong chemical bond. Almost
all solids adsorb gases. The extent of adsorption of a gas on a solid depends upon
nature of gas, nature of solid, surface area of the solid, pressure of gas and
temperature of gas. The relationship between the extent of adsorption (x/m) and
pressure of the gas at constant temperature is known as adsorption isotherm.
A catalyst is a substance which enhances the rate of a chemical reaction without
itself getting used up in the reaction. The phenomenon using catalyst is known as
catalysis. In homogeneous catalysis, the catalyst is in the same phase as are the
reactants, and in heterogeneous catalysis the catalyst is in a different phase from
that of the reactants.
Colloidal solutions are intermediate between true solutions and suspensions.
The size of the colloidal particles range from 1 to 1000 nm. A colloidal system consists
of two phases - the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium. Colloidal systems
are classified in three ways depending upon (i) physical states of the dispersed phase
and dispersion medium (ii) nature of interaction between the dispersed phase and
dispersion medium and (iii) nature of particles of dispersed phase. The colloidal
systems show interesting optical, mechanical and electrical properties. The process
of changing the colloidal particles in a sol into the insoluble precipitate by addition
of some suitable electrolytes is known as coagulation. Emulsions are colloidal systems
in which both dispersed phase and dispersion medium are liquids. These can be of:
(i) oil in water type and (ii) water in oil type. The process of making emulsion is
known as emulsification. To stabilise an emulsion, an emulsifying agent or emulsifier
is added. Soaps and detergents are most frequently used as emulsifiers. Colloids find
several applications in industry as well as in daily life.
145 Surface Chemistry
2017-18Exercises
5.1 Distinguish between the meaning of the terms adsorption and absorption.
Give one example of each.
5.2 What is the difference between physisorption and chemisorption?
5.3 Give reason why a finely divided substance is more effective as an adsorbent.
5.4 What are the factors which influence the adsorption of a gas on a solid?
5.5 What is an adsorption isotherm? Describe Freundlich adsorption isotherm.
5.6 What do you understand by activation of adsorbent? How is it achieved?
5.7 What role does adsorption play in heterogeneous catalysis?
5.8 Why is adsorption always exothermic ?
5.9 How are the colloidal solutions classified on the basis of physical states of
the dispersed phase and dispersion medium?
5.10 Discuss the effect of pressure and temperature on the adsorption of gases
on solids.
5.11 What are lyophilic and lyophobic sols? Give one example of each type. Why
are hydrophobic sols easily coagulated ?
5.12 What is the difference between multimolecular and macromolecular colloids?
Give one example of each. How are associated colloids different from these
two types of colloids?
5.13 What are enzymes ? Write in brief the mechanism of enzyme catalysis.
5.14 How are colloids classified on the basis of
(i) physical states of components
(ii) nature of dispersed phase and
(iii) interaction between dispersed phase and dispersion medium?
5.15 Explain what is observed
(i) when a beam of light is passed through a colloidal sol.
(ii) an electrolyte, NaCl is added to hydrated ferric oxide sol.
(iii) electric current is passed through a colloidal sol?
5.16 What are emulsions? What are their different types? Give example of each type.
5.17 How do emulsifires stabilise emulsion? Name two emulsifiers.
5.18 Action of soap is due to emulsification and micelle formation. Comment.
5.19 Give four examples of heterogeneous catalysis.
5.20 What do you mean by activity and selectivity of catalysts?
5.21 Describe some features of catalysis by zeolites.
5.22 What is shape selective catalysis?
5.23 Explain the following terms:
(i) Electrophoresis (ii) Coagulation
5.24 Give four uses of emulsions.
5.25 What are micelles? Give an example of a micellers system.
5.26 Explain the terms with suitable examples:
(i) Alcosol
(ii) Aerosol
5.27 Comment on the statement that “colloid is not a substance but a state of
substance”.
(iii) Dialysis
(iv) Tyndall effect.
(iii) Hydrosol.
Chemistry 146
2017-18
Unit
6
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• explain the terms minerals,
ores, concentration, benefaction,
calcination, roasting, refining, etc.;
• understand the principles of
oxidation and reduction as applied
to the extraction procedures;
• apply
the
thermodynamic
concepts like that of Gibbs energy
and entropy to the principles of
extraction of Al, Cu, Zn and Fe;
• explain why reduction of certain
oxides like Cu 2 O is much easier
than that of Fe 2 O 3 ;
• explain why CO is a favourable
reducing
agent
at
certain
temperatures while coke is better
in some other cases;
• explain why specific reducing
agents are used for the reduction
purposes.
Gener
al P Principles
rinciples and
General
P r ocesses o of f Isolation
o f Element
Elements s
Thermodynamics illustrates why only a certain reducing element
and a minimum specific temperature are suitable for reduction of a
metal oxide to the metal in an extraction.
A few elements like carbon, sulphur, gold and noble
gases, occur in free state while others in combined forms
in the earth’s crust. The extraction and isolation of an
element from its combined form involves various
principles of chemistry. A particular element may occur
in a variety of compounds. The process of metallurgy
and isolation should be such that it is chemically feasible
and commercially viable. Still, some general principles
are common to all the extraction processes of metals.
For obtaining a particular metal, first we look for
minerals which are naturally occurring chemical
substances in the earth’s crust obtainable by mining.
Out of many minerals in which a metal may be found,
only a few are viable to be used as sources of that
metal. Such minerals are known as ores.
Rarely, an ore contains only a desired substance.
It is usually contaminated with earthly or undesired
materials known as gangue. The extraction and isolation
of metals from ores involve the following major steps:
• Concentration of the ore,
• Isolation of the metal from its concentrated ore, and
• Purification of the metal.
The entire scientific and technological process used
for isolation of the metal from its ores is known as
metallurgy.In the present Unit, first we shall describe various steps for effective
concentration of ores. After that we shall discuss the principles of some
of the common metallurgical processes. Those principles shall include
the thermodynamic and electrochemical aspects involved in the effective
reduction of the concentrated ore to the metal.
6.1 Occurrence of
Metals
Elements vary in abundance. Among metals, aluminium is the most
abundant. It is the third most abundant element in earth’s crust (8.3%
approx. by weight). It is a major component of many igneous minerals
including mica and clays. Many gemstones are impure forms of Al 2 O 3
and the impurities range from Cr (in ‘ruby’) to Co (in ‘sapphire’). Iron
is the second most abundant metal in the earth’s crust. It forms a
variety of compounds and their various uses make it a very important
element. It is one of the essential elements in biological systems as well.
The principal ores of aluminium, iron, copper and zinc have been
given in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Principal Ores of Some Important Metals
Metal
Aluminium
Ores
Bauxite
Composition
Kaolinite (a form of clay) AlO x (OH) 3-2x
[where 0 < x < 1]
[Al 2 (OH) 4 Si 2 O 5 ]
Iron Haematite
Magnetite
Siderite
Iron pyrites Fe 2 O 3
Fe 3 O 4
FeCO 3
FeS 2
Copper Copper pyrites
Malachite
Cuprite
Copper glance CuFeS 2
CuCO 3 .Cu(OH) 2
Cu 2 O
Cu 2 S
Zinc Zinc blende or Sphalerite
Calamine
Zincite ZnS
ZnCO 3
ZnO
For the purpose of extraction, bauxite is chosen for aluminium. For
iron, usually the oxide ores which are abundant and do not produce
polluting gases (like SO 2 that is produced in case iron pyrites) are taken.
For copper and zinc, any of the listed ores (Table 6.1) may be used
depending upon availability and other relevant factors. Before proceeding
for concentration, ores are graded and crushed to reasonable size.
6.2 Concentration
of Ores Removal of the unwanted materials (e.g., sand, clays, etc.) from the ore
is known as concentration, dressing or benefaction. It involves several
steps and selection of these steps depends upon the differences in
physical properties of the compound of the metal present and that of
the gangue. The type of the metal, the available facilities and the
environmental factors are also taken into consideration. Some of the
important procedures are described below.
6.2.1 Hydraulic
Washing This is based on the differences in gravities of the ore and the gangue
particles. It is therefore a type of gravity separation. In one such process,
Chemistry 148an upward stream of running water is used to wash the powdered ore.
The lighter gangue particles are washed away and the heavier ores are
left behind.
6.2.2 Magnetic
Separation
6.2.3 Froth
Floatation
Method
This is based on differences in
magnetic properties of the ore
components. If either the ore
or the gangue (one of these
two) is capable of being
attracted by a magnetic
field, then such separations
are carried out (e.g., in case
of iron ores). The ground
ore is carried on a conveyer
belt which passes over a
Fig. 6.1: Magnetic separation (schematic)
magnetic roller (Fig.6.1).
This method has been in use for removing gangue from sulphide ores. In
this process, a suspension of the powdered ore is made with water. To it,
collectors and froth stabilisers are added. Collectors (e. g., pine oils, fatty
acids, xanthates, etc.) enhance non-wettability
of the mineral particles and froth stabilisers
(e. g., cresols, aniline) stabilise the froth.
The mineral particles become wet by oils
while the gangue particles by water. A rotating
paddle agitates the mixture and draws air in
it. As a result, froth is formed which carries
the mineral particles. The froth is light and is
skimmed off. It is then dried for recovery of
the ore particles.
Sometimes, it is possible to separate two
sulphide ores by adjusting proportion of oil
to water or by using ‘depressants’. For
example, in case of an ore containing ZnS
and PbS, the depressant used is NaCN. It
selectively prevents ZnS from coming to the
Fig. 6.2: Froth floatation process (schematic)
froth but allows PbS to come with the froth.
The Innovative Washerwoman
One can do wonders if he or she has a scientific temperament and is attentive to
observations. A washerwoman had an innovative mind too. While washing a miner’s
overalls, she noticed that sand and similar dirt fell to the bottom of the washtub.
What was peculiar, the copper bearing compounds that had come to the clothes from
the mines, were caught in the soapsuds and so they came to the top. One of her
clients was a chemist, Mrs. Carrie Everson. The washerwoman told her experience to
Mrs. Everson. The latter thought that the idea could be used for separating copper
compounds from rocky and earth materials on large scale. This way an invention was
born. At that time only those ores were used for extraction of copper, which contained
large amounts of the metal. Invention of the Froth Floatation Method made copper
mining profitable even from the low-grade ores. World production of copper soared
and the metal became cheaper.
149
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements6.2.4 Leaching
Leaching is often used if the ore is soluble in some suitable solvent.
The following examples illustrate the procedure:
(a) Leaching of alumina from bauxite
The principal ore of aluminium, bauxite, usually contains SiO 2 ,
iron oxides and titanium oxide (TiO 2 ) as impurities. Concentration
is carried out by digesting the powdered ore with a concentrated
solution of NaOH at 473 – 523 K and 35 – 36 bar pressure. This
way, Al 2 O 3 is leached out as sodium aluminate (and SiO 2 too as
sodium silicate) leaving the impurities behind:
Al 2 O 3 (s) + 2NaOH(aq) + 3H 2 O(l) → 2Na[Al(OH) 4 ](aq)
(6.1)
The aluminate in solution is neutralised by passing CO 2 gas and hydrated
Al 2 O 3 is precipitated. At this stage, the solution is seeded with freshly
prepared samples of hydrated Al 2 O 3 which induces the precipitation:
2Na[Al(OH) 4 ](aq) + CO 2 (g) → Al 2 O 3 .xH 2 O(s) + 2NaHCO 3 (aq) (6.2)
The sodium silicate remains in the solution and hydrated alumina
is filtered, dried and heated to give back pure Al 2 O 3 :
Al 2 O 3 .xH 2 O(s)
1470 K
Al 2 O 3 (s) + xH 2 O(g)
(6.3)
(b) Other examples
In the metallurgy of silver and that of gold, the respective metal is
leached with a dilute solution of NaCN or KCN in the presence of
air (for O 2 ) from which the metal is obtained later by replacement:
–
–
4M(s) + 8CN (aq)+ 2H 2 O(aq) + O 2 (g) → 4[M(CN) 2 ] (aq) +
–
4OH (aq) (M= Ag or Au)
2 −
−
2 [ M ( CN ) 2 ] ( aq ) + Zn ( s ) → [ Zn ( CN ) 4 ]
( aq ) + 2M ( s )
(6.4)
(6.5)
Intext Questions
6.1 Which of the ores mentioned in Table 6.1 can be concentrated by
magnetic separation method?
6.2 What is the significance of leaching in the extraction of aluminium?
6.3 Extraction
of Crude
Metal from
Concentrated
Ore
The concentrated ore must be converted into a form which is suitable
for reduction. Usually the sulphide ore is converted to oxide before
reduction. Oxides are easier to reduce (for the reason see box). Thus
isolation of metals from concentrated ore involves two major steps viz.,
(a) conversion to oxide, and
(b) reduction of the oxide to metal.
(a) Conversion to oxide
(i) Calcination: Calcinaton involves heating when the volatile matter
escapes leaving behind the metal oxide:
Fe 2 O 3 .xH 2 O(s)
ZnCO 3 (s)
D
D
ZnO(s) + CO 2 (g)
CaCO 3 .MgCO 3 (s)
Chemistry 150
Fe 2 O 3 (s) + xH 2 O(g)
D
CaO(s) + MgO(s ) + 2CO 2 (g)
(6.6)
(6.7)
(6.8)(ii) Roasting: In roasting, the ore is heated in a
regular supply of air in a furnace at a
temperature below the melting point of the
metal. Some of the reactions involving
sulphide ores are:
2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2
(6.9)
2PbS + 3O 2 → 2PbO + 2SO 2
(6.10)
2Cu 2 S + 3O 2 → 2Cu 2 O + 2SO 2
(6.11)
Fig. 6.3: A section of a modern
reverberatory furnace
The sulphide ores of copper are heated
in reverberatory furnace. If the ore contains
iron, it is mixed with silica before heating.
Iron oxide ‘slags of ’* as iron silicate and
copper is produced in the form of copper
matte which contains Cu 2 S and FeS.
FeO + SiO 2 → FeSiO 3
(6.12)
(slag)
The SO 2 produced is utilised for manufacturing H 2 SO 4 .
(b) Reduction of oxide to the metal
Reduction of the metal oxide usually involves heating it with some
other substance acting as a reducing agent (C or CO or even another
metal). The reducing agent (e.g., carbon) combines with the oxygen
of the metal oxide.
M x O y + yC → xM + y CO
(6.13)
Some metal oxides get reduced easily while others are very
difficult to be reduced (reduction means electron gain or
electronation). In any case, heating is required. To understand the
variation in the temperature requirement for thermal reductions
(pyrometallurgy) and to predict which element will suit as the
reducing agent for a given metal oxide (M x O y ), Gibbs energy
interpretations are made.
6.4
Thermodynamic
Principles of
Metallurgy
*
Some basic concepts of thermodynamics help us in understanding the
theory of metallurgical transformations. Gibbs energy is the most
significant term here.The change in Gibbs energy, ∆G for any process
at any specified temperature, is described by the equation:
∆G = ∆H – T∆S
(6.14)
where, ∆H is the enthalpy change and ∆S is the entropy change for
the process. For any reaction, this change could also be explained
through the equation:
V
∆G = – RTlnK
(6.15)
where, K is the equilibrium constant of the ‘reactant – product’
system at the temperature,T. A negative ∆G implies a +ve K in equation
6.15. And this can happen only when reaction proceeds towards
products. From these facts we can make the following conclusions:
During metallurgy, ‘flux’ is added which combines with ‘gangue’ to form ‘slag’. Slag separates more easily from
the ore than the gangue. This way, removal of gangue becomes easier.
151
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements1. When the value of ∆G is negative in equation 6.14, only then the
reaction will proceed. If ∆S is positive, on increasing the temperature
(T), the value of T∆S would increase (∆H < T∆S) and then ∆G will
become –ve.
2. If reactants and products of two reactions are put together in a system
and the net ∆G of the two possible reactions is –ve, the overall reaction
will occur. So the process of interpretation involves coupling of the
two reactions, getting the sum of their ∆G and looking for its
magnitude and sign. Such coupling is easily understood through
V
Gibbs energy (∆G ) vs T plots for formation of the oxides (Fig. 6.4).
Ellingham Diagram
The graphical representation of Gibbs energy was first used by H.J.T.Ellingham.
This provides a sound basis for considering the choice of reducing agent in the
reduction of oxides. This is known as Ellingham Diagram. Such diagrams help us
in predicting the feasibility of thermal reduction of an ore. The criterion of feasibility
is that at a given temperature, Gibbs energy of the reaction must be negative.
(a) Ellingham diagram normally consists of plots of ∆ f G V vs T for formation of oxides
of elements i.e., for the reaction,
2xM(s) + O 2 (g) → 2M x O(s)
In this reaction, the gaseous amount (hence molecular randomness) is decreasing
from left to right due to the consumption of gases leading to a –ve value of ∆S
which changes the sign of the second term in equation (6.14). Subsequently ∆G
shifts towards higher side despite rising T (normally, ∆G decreases i.e., goes to
lower side with increasing temperature). The result is +ve slope in the curve for
most of the reactions shown above for formation of M x O(s).
(b) Each plot is a straight line except when some change in phase (s→liq or liq→g)
takes place. The temperature at which such change occurs, is indicated by an
increase in the slope on +ve side (e.g., in the Zn, ZnO plot, the melting is indicated
by an abrupt change in the curve).
(c) There is a point in a curve below which ∆G is negative (So M x O is stable). Above
this point, M x O will decompose on its own.
(d) In an Ellingham diagram, the plots of ∆G V for oxidation (and therefore reduction
of the corresponding species) of common metals and some reducing agents are
given. The values of ∆ f G V , etc.(for formation of oxides) at different temperatures
are depicted which make the interpretation easy.
(e) Similar diagrams are also constructed for sulfides and halides and it becomes
clear why reductions of M x S is difficult. There, the ∆ f G V of M x S is not compensated.
Limitations of Ellingham Diagram
1. The graph simply indicates whether a reaction is possible or not i.e., the tendency
of reduction with a reducing agent is indicated. This is so because it is based
only on the thermodynamic concepts. It does not say about the kinetics of the
reduction process (Cannot answer questions like how fast it could be ?).
2. The interpretation of ∆G V is based on K (∆G V = – RT lnK). Thus it is presumed
that the reactants and products are in equilibrium:
M x O + A red l xM + AO ox
This is not always true because the reactant/product may be solid. [However it explains
how the reactions are sluggish when every species is in solid state and smooth when
Chemistry 152the ore melts down.It is interestng to note here that ∆H (enthalpy change) and the ∆S
(entropy change) values for any chemical reaction remain nearly constant even on
varying temperature. So the only dominant variable in equation(6.14) becomes T.
However, ∆S depends much on the physical state of the compound. Since entropy
depends on disorder or randomness in the system, it will increase if a compound melts
(s→l) or vapourises (l→g) since molecular randomness increases on changing the phase
from solid to liquid or from liquid to gas].
The reducing agent forms its oxide when the metal oxide is reduced.
V
The role of reducing agent is to provide ∆G negative and large enough
V
to make the sum of ∆G of the two reactions (oxidation of the reducing
agent and reduction of the metal oxide) negative.
As we know, during reduction, the oxide of a metal decomposes:
1
M x O(s) → xM (solid or liq) +
O (g)
(6.16)
2 2
The reducing agent takes away the oxygen. Equation 6.16 can be
V
visualised as reverse of the oxidation of the metal. And then, the ∆ f G
value is written in the usual way:
1
V
xM(s or l) +
O (g) → M x O(s)
[∆G (M,MxO) ]
(6.17)
2 2
If reduction is being carried out through equation 6.16, the
oxidation of the reducing agent (e.g., C or CO) will be there:
1
C(s) +
O (g) → CO(g)
[∆G (C, CO) ]
(6.18)
2 2
1
O (g) → CO 2 (g)
[∆G (CO, CO 2 ) ]
(6.19)
CO(g) +
2 2
If carbon is taken, there may also be complete oxidation of the
element to CO 2 :
1
1
1
1
C(s) +
O (g) →
CO 2 (g)
[
∆G (C, CO 2 ) ]
(6.20)
2
2 2
2
2
On subtracting equation 6.17 [it means adding its negative or the
reverse form as in equation 6.16] from one of the three equations, we get:
M x O(s) + C(s) → xM(s or l) + CO(g)
(6.21)
M x O(s) + CO(g) → xM(s or l) + CO 2 (g)
(6.22)
1
1
M x O(s) +
C(s) → xM(s or l) +
CO 2 (g)
(6.23)
2
2
These reactions describe the actual reduction of the metal oxide,
0
M x O that we want to accomplish. The ∆ r G values for these reactions in
general, can be obtained by similar subtraction of the corresponding
0
∆ f G values.
As we have seen, heating (i.e., increasing T) favours a negative
0
value of ∆ r G . Therefore, the temperature is chosen such that the sum
0
0
of ∆ r G in the two combined redox process is negative. In ∆ r G vs
T plots, this is indicated by the point of intersection of the two curves
(curve for M x O and that for the oxidation of the reducing substance).
0
After that point, the ∆ r G value becomes more negative for the combined
0
process including the reduction of M x O. The difference in the two ∆ r G
values after that point determines whether reductions of the oxide of
the upper line is feasible by the element represented by the lower line.
If the difference is large, the reduction is easier.
153
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of ElementsExample 6.1 Suggest a condition under which magnesium could reduce alumina.
Solution
The two equations are:
4
2
Al + O 2 →
Al O
(b) 2Mg +O 2 → 2MgO
3
3 2 3
At the point of intersection of the Al 2 O 3 and MgO curves (marked “A”
0
in diagram 6.4), the ∆G becomes ZERO for the reaction:
(a)
2
4
Al O +2Mg → 2MgO + Al
3 2 3
3
Below that point magnesium can reduce alumina.
Example 6.2 Although thermodynamically feasible, in practice, magnesium metal is not
used for the reduction of alumina in the metallurgy of aluminium. Why ?
Solution Temperatures below the point of intersection of Al 2 O 3 and MgO curves,
magnesium can reduce alumina. But the process will be uneconomical.
Example 6.3 Why is the reduction of a metal oxide easier if the metal formed is in
liquid state at the temperature of reduction?
Solution The entropy is higher if the metal is in liquid state than when it is in
solid state. The value of entropy change (∆S) of the reduction process
is more on +ve side when the metal formed is in liquid state and the
0
metal oxide being reduced is in solid state. Thus the value of ∆G
becomes more on negative side and the reduction becomes easier.
6.4.1 Applications
(a) Extraction of iron from its oxides
Oxide ores of iron, after concentration through calcination/roasting
(to remove water, to decompose carbonates and to oxidise sulphides)
are mixed with limestone and coke and fed into a Blast furnace from
its top. Here, the oxide is reduced to the metal. Thermodynamics
helps us to understand how coke reduces the oxide and why this
furnace is chosen. One of the main reduction steps in this process is:
FeO(s) + C(s) → Fe(s/l) + CO (g)
(6.24)
It can be seen as a couple of two simpler reactions. In one, the
reduction of FeO is taking place and in the other, C is being oxidised
to CO:
1
FeO(s) → Fe(s) +
O (g)
[∆G (FeO, Fe) ]
(6.25)
2 2
1
C(s) +
O (g) → CO (g)
[∆G (C, CO) ]
(6.26)
2 2
When both the reactions take place to yield the equation (6.24), the
net Gibbs energy change becomes:
∆G (C, CO) + ∆G (FeO, Fe) = ∆ r G
(6.27)
Naturally, the resultant reaction will take place when the right hand
0
side in equation 6.27 is negative. In ∆G vs T plot representing reaction
6.25, the plot goes upward and that representing the change C→CO
Chemistry 154(C,CO) goes downward. At temperatures above 1073K (approx.), the
C,CO line comes below the Fe,FeO line [∆G (C, CO) < ∆G (Fe, FeO) ]. So in this
range, coke will be reducing the FeO and will itself be oxidised to CO.
In a similar way the reduction of Fe 3 O 4 and Fe 2 O 3 at relatively lower
temperatures by CO can be explained on the basis of lower lying points
of intersection of their curves with the CO, CO 2 curve in Fig. 6.4.
0
-100
® 2Cu 2 O
4Cu + O 2
-200
®
+ O 2
2Fe
-300
-400
O
2Fe
C + O 2 ® CO 2
CO 2
® 2
2
O
+
2CO
O
2Zn
O 2 ®
+
2Zn
-500
-600
2C +
O 2 ®
2CO
-700
-800
O 2
Al +
®
Al 2 O 3
2/3
4/3
-900
A
O
g
® 2M
+ O 2
2Mg
-1000
-1100
-1200
0°C 400°C 800°C 1200°C 1600°C 2000°C
273 K 673 K 1073 K 1473 K 1873 K 2273 K
Temperature
Fig. 6.4: Gibbs energy ( ∆ G V ) vs T plots (schematic) for formation of some
oxides (Ellingham diagram)
In the Blast furnace, reduction of iron oxides takes place in different
temperature ranges. Hot air is blown from the bottom of the furnace
and coke is burnt to give temperature upto about 2200K in the lower
portion itself. The burning of coke therefore supplies most of the heat
required in the process. The CO and heat moves to upper part of the
furnace. In upper part, the temperature is lower and the iron oxides
(Fe 2 O 3 and Fe 3 O 4 ) coming from the top are reduced in steps to FeO.
Thus, the reduction reactions taking place in the lower temperature
range and in the higher temperature range, depend on the points of
0
corresponding intersections in the ∆ r G vs T plots. These reactions can
be summarised as follows:
At 500 – 800 K (lower temperature range in the blast furnace) –
3 Fe 2 O 3 + CO → 2 Fe 3 O 4 + CO 2
Fe 3 O 4 + 4 CO → 3Fe + 4 CO 2
Fe 2 O 3 + CO → 2FeO + CO 2
155
(6.28)
(6.29)
(6.30)
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of ElementsAt 900 – 1500 K (higher temperature range in the blast
furnace):
C + CO 2 → 2 CO
(6.31)
FeO + CO → Fe + CO 2
(6.32)
Limestone is also decomposed to CaO
which removes silicate impurity of the ore
as slag. The slag is in molten state and
separates out from iron.
The iron obtained from Blast furnace
contains about 4% carbon and many
impurities in smaller amount (e.g., S, P, Si,
Mn). This is known as pig iron and cast into
variety of shapes. Cast iron is different from
pig iron and is made by melting pig iron
with scrap iron and coke using hot air blast.
It has slightly lower carbon content (about
3%) and is extremely hard and brittle.
Further Reductions
Wrought iron or malleable iron is the
purest form of commercial iron and is
prepared from cast iron by oxidising impurities in a
reverberatory furnace lined with haematite. This
haematite oxidises carbon to carbon monoxide:
Fe 2 O 3 + 3 C → 2 Fe + 3 CO
(6.33)
Fig. 6.5: Blast furnace
Limestone is added as a flux and sulphur, silicon
and phosphorus are oxidised and passed into the slag. The metal is
removed and freed from the slag by passing through rollers.
(b) Extraction of copper from cuprous oxide [copper(I) oxide]
In the graph of ∆ r G 0 vs T for formation of oxides (Fig. 6.4), the
Cu 2 O line is almost at the top. So it is quite easy to reduce oxide
ores of copper directly to the metal by heating with coke (both
the lines of C, CO and C, CO 2 are at much lower positions in the
graph particularly after 500 – 600K). However most of the ores
are sulphide and some may also contain iron. The sulphide ores
are roasted/smelted to give oxides:
2Cu 2 S + 3O 2 → 2Cu 2 O + 2SO 2
(6.34)
The oxide can then be easily reduced to metallic copper using coke:
Cu 2 O + C → 2 Cu + CO
(6.35)
In actual process, the ore is heated in a reverberatory furnace after
mixing with silica. In the furnace, iron oxide ‘slags of’ as iron silicate
and copper is produced in the form of copper matte. This contains
Cu 2 S and FeS.
FeO + SiO 2 → FeSiO 3
(6.36)
(Slag)
Copper matte is then charged into silica lined convertor. Some
silica is also added and hot air blast is blown to convert the remaining
Chemistry 156FeS, FeO and Cu 2 S/Cu 2 O to the metallic copper. Following reactions
take place:
2FeS + 3O 2 → 2FeO + 2SO 2
(6.37)
FeO + SiO 2 → FeSiO 3
(6.38)
2Cu 2 S + 3O 2 → 2Cu 2 O + 2SO 2
(6.39)
2Cu 2 O + Cu 2 S → 6Cu + SO 2
(6.40)
The solidified copper obtained has blistered appearance due to the
evolution of SO 2 and so it is called blister copper.
(c) Extraction of zinc from zinc oxide
The reduction of zinc oxide is done using coke. The temperature in
this case is higher than that in case of copper. For the purpose of
heating, the oxide is made into brickettes with coke and clay.
coke,1673K
ZnO + C
Zn + CO
The metal is distilled off and collected by rapid chilling.
(6.41)
Intext Questions
6.3 The reaction,
Cr 2 O 3 + 2 Al → Al 2 O 3 + 2 Cr
(∆G 0 = – 421 kJ)
is thermodynamically feasible as is apparent from the Gibbs energy value.
Why does it not take place at room temperature?
6.4 Is it true that under certain conditions, Mg can reduce Al 2 O 3 and Al can
reduce MgO? What are those conditions?
6.5
Electrochemical
Principles of
Metallurgy
We have seen how principles of thermodyamics are applied to
pyrometallurgy. Similar principles are effective in the reductions of metal
ions in solution or molten state. Here they are reduced by electrolysis or
by adding some reducing element.
In the reduction of a molten metal salt, electrolysis is done. Such
methods are based on electrochemical principles which could be
understood through the equation,
∆G 0 = – nE 0 F
(6.42)
0
here n is the number of electrons and E is the electrode potential of
the redox couple formed in the system. More reactive metals have large
negative values of the electrode potential. So their reduction is difficult.
0
0
If the difference of two E values corresponds to a positive E and
0
consequently negative ∆G in equation 6.42, then the less reactive metal
will come out of the solution and the more reactive metal will go to the
solution, e.g.,
2+
2+
Cu (aq) + Fe(s) → Cu(s) + Fe (aq)
(6.43)
n+
In simple electrolysis, the M ions are discharged at negative
electrodes (cathodes) and deposited there. Precautions are taken
considering the reactivity of the metal produced and suitable materials
are used as electrodes. Sometimes a flux is added for making the
molten mass more conducting.
157
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of ElementsAluminium
In the metallurgy of aluminium, purified Al 2 O 3 is mixed with Na 3 AlF 6
or CaF 2 which lowers the melting point of the mix and brings
conductivity. The fused matrix is electrolysed. Steel vessel with lining
of carbon acts as cathode and graphite
anode is used. The overall reaction may
be written as:
Fig. 6.6: Electrolytic cell for the
extraction of aluminium
2Al 2 O 3 + 3C → 4Al + 3CO 2 (6.44)
This process of electrolysis is widely
known as Hall-Heroult process.
Thus electrolysis of the molten mass
is carried out in an electrolytic cell using
carbon electrodes. The oxygen liberated
at anode reacts with the carbon of anode
producing CO and CO 2 . This way for each kg of
aluminium produced, about 0.5 kg of carbon
anode is burnt away. The electrolytic reactions are:
3+
–
Cathode: Al (melt) + 3e → Al(l)
2–
–
C(s) + O (melt) → CO(g) + 2e
2–
–
C(s) + 2O (melt) → CO 2 (g) + 4e
Anode:
(6.45)
(6.46)
(6.47)
Copper from Low Grade Ores and Scraps
Copper is extracted by hydrometallurgy from low grade ores. It is leached
2+
out using acid or bacteria. The solution containing Cu is treated with
scrap iron or H 2 (equations 6.42; 6.48).
2+
+
Cu (aq) + H 2 (g) → Cu(s) + 2H (aq)
(6.48)
Example 6.4 At a site, low grade copper ores are available and zinc and iron scraps
are also available. Which of the two scraps would be more suitable for
reducing the leached copper ore and why?
Solution Zinc being above iron in the electrochemical series (more reactive
metal is zinc), the reduction will be faster in case zinc scraps are
used. But zinc is costlier metal than iron so using iron scraps will be
advisable and advantageous.
6.6 Oxidation
Reduction
Besides reductions, some extractions are based on oxidation particularly
for non-metals. A very common example of extraction based on
oxidation is the extraction of chlorine from brine (chlorine is abundant
in sea water as common salt) .
–
–
2Cl (aq) + 2H 2 O(l) → 2OH (aq) + H 2 (g) + Cl 2 (g)
(6.49)
0
0
The ∆G for this reaction is + 422 kJ. When it is converted to E
(using ∆G 0 = – nE 0 F), we get E 0 = – 2.2 V. Naturally, it will require an
external e.m.f. that is greater than 2.2 V. But the electrolysis requires
an excess potential to overcome some other hindering reactions. Thus,
Cl 2 is obtained by electrolysis giving out H 2 and aqueous NaOH as by-
products. Electrolysis of molten NaCl is also carried out. But in that
case, Na metal is produced and not NaOH.
Chemistry 158As studied earlier, extraction of gold and silver involves leaching the
–
+
+
metal with CN . This is also an oxidation reaction (Ag → Ag or Au → Au ).
The metal is later recovered by displacement method.
–
4Au(s) + 8CN (aq) + 2H 2 O(aq) + O 2 (g) →
–
–
4[Au(CN) 2 ] (aq) + 4OH (aq)
–
2–
2[Au(CN) 2 ] (aq) + Zn(s) → 2Au(s) + [Zn(CN) 4 ] (aq)
In this reaction zinc acts as a reducing agent.
6.7 Refining
(6.50)
(6.51)
A metal extracted by any method is usually contaminated with some
impurity. For obtaining metals of high purity, several techniques are
used depending upon the differences in properties of the metal and the
impurity. Some of them are listed below.
(a) Distillation
(b) Liquation
(c) Electrolysis
(d) Zone refining
(e) Vapour phase refining
(f ) Chromatographic methods
These are described in detail here.
(a) Distillation
This is very useful for low boiling metals like zinc and mercury. The
impure metal is evaporated to obtain the pure metal as distillate.
(b) Liquation
In this method a low melting metal like tin can be made to flow on
a sloping surface. In this way it is separated from higher melting
impurities.
(c) Electrolytic refining
In this method, the impure metal is made to act as anode. A strip
of the same metal in pure form is used as cathode. They are put in
a suitable electrolytic bath containing soluble salt of the same metal.
The more basic metal remains in the solution and the less basic
ones go to the anode mud. This process is also explained using the
concept of electrode potential, over potential, and Gibbs energy
which you have seen in previous sections. The reactions are:
n+
–
Anode:
M → M + ne
n+
–
Cathode: M + ne → M
(6.52)
Copper is refined using an electrolytic method. Anodes are of
impure copper and pure copper strips are taken as cathode. The
electrolyte is acidified solution of copper sulphate and the net result
of electrolysis is the transfer of copper in pure form from the anode
to the cathode:
2+
–
Anode:
Cu → Cu + 2 e
Cathode: Cu 2+ + 2e – → Cu
(6.53)
Impurities from the blister copper deposit as anode mud which
contains antimony, selenium, tellurium, silver, gold and platinum;
recovery of these elements may meet the cost of refining.
Zinc may also be refined this way.
159
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements(d) Zone refining
This method is based on the principle that the impurities are more
soluble in the melt than in the solid state of the metal. A circular
mobile heater is fixed at one end of a rod of the impure metal
(Fig. 6.7). The molten zone moves along with the heater which is
moved forward. As the heater moves forward, the pure metal
crystallises out of the melt and the impurities pass on into
the adjacent molten zone. The process is
repeated several times and the heater is moved
in the same direction. At one end, impurities
get concentrated. This end is cut off. This
method is very useful for producing
semiconductor and other metals of very high
purity, e.g., germanium, silicon, boron,
Fig. 6.7: Zone refining process
gallium and indium.
(e) Vapour phase refining
In this method, the metal is converted into its volatile compound
and collected elsewhere. It is then decomposed to give pure metal.
So, the two requirements are:
(i) the metal should form a volatile compound with an available
reagent,
(ii) the volatile compound should be easily decomposable, so that
the recovery is easy.
Following examples will illustrate this technique.
Mond Process for Refining Nickel: In this process, nickel is heated in a
stream of carbon monoxide forming a volatile complex, nickel
tetracarbonyl:
330 – 350 K
Ni(CO) 4
(6.54)
Ni + 4CO
The carbonyl is subjected to higher temperature so that it is
decomposed giving the pure metal:
Ni(CO) 4
450 – 470 K
Ni + 4CO
(6.55)
van Arkel Method for Refining Zirconium or Titanium: This method is
very useful for removing all the oxygen and nitrogen present in the
form of impurity in certain metals like Zr and Ti. The crude metal is
heated in an evacuated vessel with iodine. The metal iodide being
more covalent, volatilises:
Zr + 2I 2 → ZrI 4
(6.56)
The metal iodide is decomposed on a tungsten filament, electrically
heated to about 1800K. The pure metal is thus deposited on the
filament.
ZrI 4 → Zr + 2I 2
(6.57)
(f)
Chromatographic methods
This method is based on the principle that different components of a
mixture are differently adsorbed on an adsorbent. The mixture is put
in a liquid or gaseous medium which is moved through the adsorbent.
Chemistry 160Different components are adsorbed at different levels on the column.
Later the adsorbed components are removed (eluted) by using suitable
solvents (eluant). Depending upon the physical state of the moving
medium and the adsorbent material and also on the process of passage
of the moving medium, the chromatographic method* is given the name.
In one such method the column of Al 2 O 3 is prepared in a glass tube
and the moving medium containing a solution of the components is in
liquid form. This is an example of column chromatography. This is very
useful for purification of the elements which are available in minute
quantities and the impurities are not very different in chemical properties
from the element to be purified. There are several chromatographic
techniques such as paper chromatography, column chromatography,
gas chromatography, etc. Procedures followed in column
chromatography have been depicted in Fig. 6.8.
Fig. 6.8: Schematic diagrams showing column chromatography
*
Looking it the other way, chromatography in general, involves a mobile phase and a stationary phase. The
sample or sample extract is dissolved in a mobile phase. The mobile phase may be a gas, a liquid or a
supercritical fluid. The stationary phase is immobile and immiscible (like the Al 2 O 3 column in the example
of column chromatography above). The mobile phase is then forced through the stationary phase. The
mobile phase and the stationary phase are chosen such that components of the sample have different
solubilities in the two phases. A component which is quite soluble in the stationary phase takes longer
time to travel through it than a component which is not very soluble in the stationary phase but very
soluble in the mobile phase. Thus sample components are separated from each other as they travel
through the stationary phase. Depending upon the two phases and the way sample is inserted/injected,
the chromatographic technique is named. These methods have been described in detail in Unit 12 of Class
XI text book (12.8.5).
161
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements6 . 8 Uses of
Aluminium,
Copper
Copper, , Zinc
and Iron
Aluminium foils are used as wrappers for chocolates. The fine dust of
the metal is used in paints and lacquers. Aluminium, being highly
reactive, is also used in the extraction of chromium and manganese
from their oxides. Wires of aluminium are used as electricity conductors.
Alloys containing aluminium, being light, are very useful.
Copper is used for making wires used in electrical industry and for
water and steam pipes. It is also used in several alloys that are rather
tougher than the metal itself, e.g., brass (with zinc), bronze (with tin)
and coinage alloy (with nickel).
Zinc is used for galvanising iron. It is also used in large quantities
in batteries, as a constituent of many alloys, e.g., brass, (Cu 60%, Zn
40%) and german silver (Cu 25-30%, Zn 25-30%, Ni 40–50%). Zinc
dust is used as a reducing agent in the manufacture of dye-stuffs,
paints, etc.
Cast iron, which is the most important form of iron, is used for
casting stoves, railway sleepers, gutter pipes , toys, etc. It is used in the
manufacture of wrought iron and steel. Wrought iron is used in making
anchors, wires, bolts, chains and agricultural implements. Steel finds
a number of uses. Alloy steel is obtained when other metals are added
to it. Nickel steel is used for making cables, automobiles and aeroplane
parts, pendulum, measuring tapes, chrome steel for cutting tools and
crushing machines, and stainless steel for cycles, automobiles, utensils,
pens, etc.
Summary
Metals are required for a variety of purposes. For this, we need their extraction from
the minerals in which they are present and from which their extraction is
commercially feasible.These minerals are known as ores. Ores of the metal are
associated with many impurities. Removal of these impurities to certain extent is
achieved in concentration steps. The concentrated ore is then treated chemically
for obtaining the metal. Usually the metal compounds (e.g., oxides, sulphides) are
reduced to the metal. The reducing agents used are carbon, CO or even some metals.
In these reduction processes, the thermodynamic and electrochemical concepts
are given due consideration. The metal oxide reacts with a reducing agent; the
oxide is reduced to the metal and the reducing agent is oxidised. In the two reactions,
the net Gibbs energy change is negative, which becomes more negative on raising
the temperature. Conversion of the physical states from solid to liquid or to gas,
and formation of gaseous states favours decrease in the Gibbs energy for the entire
system. This concept is graphically displayed in plots of ∆G 0 vs T (Ellingham diagram)
for such oxidation/reduction reactions at different temperatures. The concept of
electrode potential is useful in the isolation of metals (e.g., Al, Ag, Au) where the
sum of the two redox couples is +ve so that the Gibbs energy change is negative.
The metals obtained by usual methods still contain minor impurities. Getting pure
metals require refining. Refining process depends upon the differences in properties
of the metal and the impurities. Extraction of aluminium is usually carried out from
its bauxite ore by leaching it with NaOH. Sodium aluminate, thus formed, is separated
and then neutralised to give back the hydrated oxide, which is then electrolysed
using cryolite as a flux. Extraction of iron is done by reduction of its oxide ore in
blast furnace. Copper is extracted by smelting and heating in a reverberatory furnace.
Extraction of zinc from zinc oxides is done using coke. Several methods are employed
Chemistry 162in refining the metal. Metals, in general, are very widely used and have contributed
significantly in the development of a variety of industries.
A Summary of the Occurrence and Extraction of some Metals is
Presented in the following Table
Metal
Common method
of extraction
Occurrence
Remarks
Aluminium 1. Bauxite, Al 2 O 3 . x H 2 O
2. Cryolite, Na 3 AlF 6 Electrolysis of
Al 2 O 3 dissolved in
molten Na 3 AlF 6 For the extraction, a
good source of
electricity is required.
Iron 1. Haematite, Fe 2 O 3
2. Magnetite, Fe 3 O 4 Reduction of the
oxide with CO
and coke in Blast
furnace Temperature
approaching 2170 K
is required.
Copper 1. Copper pyrites, CuFeS 2
2. Copper glance, Cu 2 S
3. Malachite,
CuCO 3 .Cu(OH) 2
4. Cuprite, Cu 2 O Roasting of
sulphide
partially and
reduction It is self reduction in a
specially designed
converter. The
reduction takes place
easily. Sulphuric acid
leaching is also used
in hydrometallurgy
from low grade ores.
Zinc 1. Zinc blende or
Sphalerite, ZnS
2. Calamine, ZnCO 3
3. Zincite, ZnO Roasting followed
by reduction with
coke The metal may be
purified by fractional
distillation.
Exercises
6.1 Copper can be extracted by hydrometallurgy but not zinc. Explain.
6.2 What is the role of depressant in froth floatation process?
6.3 Why is the extraction of copper from pyrites more difficult than that from its
oxide ore through reduction?
6.4 Explain: (i) Zone refining
6.5 Out of C and CO, which is a better reducing agent at 673 K ?
6.6 Name the common elements present in the anode mud in electrolytic refining
of copper. Why are they so present ?
6.7 Write down the reactions taking place in different zones in the blast furnace
during the extraction of iron.
6.8 Write chemical reactions taking place in the extraction of zinc from zinc blende.
6.9 State the role of silica in the metallurgy of copper.
(ii) Column chromatography.
6.10 What is meant by the term “chromatography”?
6.11 What criterion is followed for the selection of the stationary phase in
chromatography?
163
General Principles and Processes of Isolation of Elements6.12 Describe a method for refining nickel.
6.13 How can you separate alumina from silica in a bauxite ore associated with
silica? Give equations, if any.
6.14 Giving examples, differentiate between ‘roasting’ and ‘calcination’.
6.15 How is ‘cast iron’ different from ‘pig iron”?
6.16 Differentiate between “minerals” and “ores”.
6.17 Why copper matte is put in silica lined converter?
6.18 What is the role of cryolite in the metallurgy of aluminium?
6.19 How is leaching carried out in case of low grade copper ores?
6.20 Why is zinc not extracted from zinc oxide through reduction using CO?
6.21 The value of ∆ f G 0 for formation of Cr 2 O 3 is – 540 kJmol −1 and that of Al 2 O 3 is
– 827 kJmol −1 . Is the reduction of Cr 2 O 3 possible with Al ?
6.22 Out of C and CO, which is a better reducing agent for ZnO ?
6.23 The choice of a reducing agent in a particular case depends on
thermodynamic factor. How far do you agree with this statement? Support
your opinion with two examples.
6.24 Name the processes from which chlorine is obtained as a by-product. What
will happen if an aqueous solution of NaCl is subjected to electrolysis?
6.25 What is the role of graphite rod in the electrometallurgy of aluminium?
6.26 Outline the principles of refining of metals by the following methods:
(i) Zone refining
(ii) Electrolytic refining
(iii) Vapour phase refining
6.27
Predict conditions under which Al might be expected to reduce MgO.
(Hint: See Intext question 6.4)
Answers to Some Intext Questions
6.1 Ores in which one of the components (either the impurity or the actual ore) is
magnetic can be concentrated, e.g., ores containing iron (haematite, magnetite,
siderite and iron pyrites).
6.2 Leaching is significant as it helps in removing the impurities like SiO 2 , Fe 2 O 3 ,
etc. from the bauxite ore.
6.3 Certain amount of activation energy is essential even for such reactions which
are thermodynamically feasible, therefore heating is required.
6.4 Yes, below 1350°C Mg can reduce Al 2 O 3 and above 1350°C, Al can reduce MgO.
This can be inferred from ∆G V Vs T plots (Fig. 6.4).
Chemistry 164
Unit
7
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• appreciate general trends in the
chemistry of elements of groups
15,16,17 and 18;
• learn the preparation, properties
and uses of dinitrogen and
phosphorus and some of their
important compounds;
• describe
the
preparation,
properties and uses of dioxygen
and ozone and chemistry of some
simple oxides;
• know allotropic forms of sulphur,
chemistry
of
its
important
compounds and the structures of
its oxoacids;
• describe
the
preparation,
properties and uses of chlorine
and hydrochloric acid;
• know
the
chemistry
of
interhalogens and structures of
oxoacids of halogens;
• enumerate the uses of noble
gases;
• appreciate the importance of
these
elements
and
their
compounds in our day to day life.
The p -Block
Element
Elements s
Diversity in chemistry is the hallmark of p–block elements manifested
in their ability to react with the elements of s–, d– and f–blocks as
well as with their own.
In Class XI, you have learnt that the p-block elements
are placed in groups 13 to 18 of the periodic table.
Their valence shell electronic configuration is ns 2 np 1–6
2
(except He which has 1s configuration). The properties
of p-block elements like that of others are greatly
influenced by atomic sizes, ionisation enthalpy, electron
gain enthalpy and electronegativity. The absence of d-
orbitals in second period and presence of d or d and f
orbitals in heavier elements (starting from third period
onwards) have significant effects on the properties of
elements. In addition, the presence of all the three types
of elements; metals, metalloids and non-metals bring
diversification in chemistry of these elements.
Having learnt the chemistry of elements of Groups
13 and 14 of the p-block of periodic table in Class XI,
you will learn the chemistry of the elements of
subsequent groups in this Unit.
7.1 Group 15
Elements Group 15 includes nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony and
bismuth. As we go down the group, there is a shift from non-metallic
to metallic through metalloidic character. Nitrogen and phosphorus
are non-metals, arsenic and antimony metalloids and bismuth is a
typical metal.
7.1.1 Occurrence Molecular nitrogen comprises 78% by volume of the atmosphere.
In the earth’s crust, it occurs as sodium nitrate, NaNO 3 (called Chile
saltpetre) and potassium nitrate (Indian saltpetre). It is found in the
form of proteins in plants and animals. Phosphorus occurs in mineralsof the apatite family, Ca 9 (PO 4 ) 6 . CaX 2 (X = F, Cl or OH) (e.g., fluorapatite
Ca 9 (PO 4 ) 6 . CaF 2 ) which are the main components of phosphate rocks.
Phosphorus is an essential constituent of animal and plant matter. It
is present in bones as well as in living cells. Phosphoproteins are present
in milk and eggs. Arsenic, antimony and bismuth are found mainly as
sulphide minerals.
The important atomic and physical properties of this group elements
along with their electronic configurations are given in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1: Atomic and Physical Properties of Group 15 Elements
Property
N
Atomic number
7
–1
Atomic mass/g mol
–1
(∆ i H/(kJ mol )
834 703
2856 1903 1798 1595 1610
4577 2910 2736 2443 2466
3.0 2.1 2.0 1.9 1.9
141 148
70
110
b
222
d 1089
171 212
Melting point/K 63* 317
Density/[g cm (298 K)]
III
d
77.2*
–3
0.879
b
3–
c
3+
E single bond (E = element); E ; E ;
h
At 63 K; Grey α -form; * Molecular N 2 .
554
g
d
121
b Ionic radius/pm
Boiling point/K
g
947 II
10
1.823
White phosphorus;
b
3
10
76
e
f
888
5.778
e
2
208.98
1012 1402
a
121.75
[Xe]4f 14 5d 10 6s 2 6p 3
I
III
83
[Ar]3d 4s 4p [Kr]4d 5s 5p [Ne]3s 3p
3
Bi
51
74.92
2
[He]2s 2p
Electronegativity
Covalent radius/pm
3
Sb
33
30.97
2
Ionisation enthalpy
As
15
14.01
Electronic configuration
a
P
h
2
c
3
103 c
904 544
1860 1837
6.697 9.808
Grey α -form at 38.6 atm; Sublimation temperature;
f
Trends of some of the atomic, physical and chemical properties of the
group are discussed below.
2
3
7.1.2 Electronic
Configuration The valence shell electronic configuration of these elements is ns np .
The s orbital in these elements is completely filled and p orbitals are
half-filled, making their electronic configuration extra stable.
7.1.3 Atomic and
Ionic Radii Covalent and ionic (in a particular state) radii increase in size
down the group. There is a considerable increase in covalent radius
from N to P. However, from As to Bi only a small increase in
covalent radius is observed. This is due to the presence of
completely filled d and/or f orbitals in heavier members.
7.1.4 Ionisation
Enthalpy Ionisation enthalpy decreases down the group due to gradual increase
in atomic size. Because of the extra stable half-filled p orbitals electronic
configuration and smaller size, the ionisation enthalpy of the group 15
elements is much greater than that of group 14 elements in the
corresponding periods. The order of successive ionisation enthalpies,
as expected is ∆ i H 1 < ∆ i H 2 < ∆ i H 3 (Table 7.1).
Chemistry 1667.1.5
Electronegativity The electronegativity value, in general, decreases down the group with
increasing atomic size. However, amongst the heavier elements, the
difference is not that much pronounced.
7.1.6 Physical
Properties All the elements of this group are polyatomic. Dinitrogen is a diatomic gas
while all others are solids. Metallic character increases down the group.
Nitrogen and phosphorus are non-metals, arsenic and antimony metalloids
and bismuth is a metal. This is due to decrease in ionisation enthalpy and
increase in atomic size. The boiling points, in general, increase from top to
bottom in the group but the melting point increases upto arsenic and then
decreases upto bismuth. Except nitrogen, all the elements show allotropy.
7.1.7 Chemical
Properties Oxidation states and trends in chemical reactivity
The common oxidation states of these elements are –3, +3 and +5.
The tendency to exhibit –3 oxidation state decreases down the group due
to increase in size and metallic character. In fact last member of the group,
bismuth hardly forms any compound in –3 oxidation state. The stability
of +5 oxidation state decreases down the group. The only well characterised
Bi (V) compound is BiF 5 . The stability of +5 oxidation state decreases and
that of +3 state increases (due to inert pair effect) down the group. Nitrogen
exhibits + 1, + 2, + 4 oxidation states also when it reacts with oxygen.
Phosphorus also shows +1 and +4 oxidation states in some oxoacids.
In the case of nitrogen, all oxidation states from +1 to +4 tend to
disproportionate in acid solution. For example,
3HNO 2 → HNO 3 + H 2 O + 2NO
Similarly, in case of phosphorus nearly all intermediate oxidation
states disproportionate into +5 and –3 both in alkali and acid. However
+3 oxidation state in case of arsenic, antimony and bismuth becomes
increasingly stable with respect to disproportionation.
Nitrogen is restricted to a maximum covalency of 4 since only four
(one s and three p) orbitals are available for bonding. The heavier elements
have vacant d orbitals in the outermost shell which can be used for
–
bonding (covalency) and hence, expand their covalence as in PF 6 .
Anomalous properties of nitrogen
Nitrogen differs from the rest of the members of this group due to
its small size, high electronegativity, high ionisation enthalpy and
non-availability of d orbitals. Nitrogen has unique ability to form
p π -p π multiple bonds with itself and with other elements having
small size and high electronegativity (e.g., C, O). Heavier elements of
this group do not form p π -p π bonds as their atomic orbitals are so
large and diffuse that they cannot have effective overlapping.
Thus, nitrogen exists as a diatomic molecule with a triple bond (one
s and two p) between the two atoms. Consequently, its bond enthalpy
–1
(941.4 kJ mol ) is very high. On the contrary, phosphorus, arsenic
and antimony form single bonds as P–P, As–As and Sb–Sb while
bismuth forms metallic bonds in elemental state. However, the single
N–N bond is weaker than the single P–P bond because of high
interelectronic repulsion of the non-bonding electrons, owing to the
small bond length. As a result the catenation tendency is weaker in
167 The p-Block Elementsnitrogen. Another factor which affects the chemistry of nitrogen is
the absence of d orbitals in its valence shell. Besides restricting its
covalency to four, nitrogen cannot form d π –p π bond as the heavier
elements can e.g., R 3 P = O or R 3 P = CH 2 (R = alkyl group). Phosphorus
and arsenic can form d π –d π bond also with transition metals when
their compounds like P(C 2 H 5 ) 3 and As(C 6 H 5 ) 3 act as ligands.
(i) Reactivity towards hydrogen: All the elements of Group 15
form hydrides of the type EH 3 where E = N, P, As, Sb or Bi.
Some of the properties of these hydrides are shown in Table
7.2. The hydrides show regular gradation in their properties.
The stability of hydrides decreases from NH 3 to BiH 3 which can
be observed from their bond dissociation enthalpy.
Consequently, the reducing character of the hydrides increases.
Ammonia is only a mild reducing agent while BiH 3 is the
strongest reducing agent amongst all the hydrides. Basicity also
decreases in the order NH 3 > PH 3 > AsH 3 > SbH 3 > BiH 3 .
Table 7.2: Properties of Hydrides of Group 15 Elements
Property
NH 3 PH 3 AsH 3 SbH 3 Melting point/K 195.2 139.5 156.7 185 Boiling point/K 238.5 185.5 210.6 254.6 290
(E–H) Distance/pm 101.7 141.9 151.9 170.7 –
HEH angle (°) 107.8 93.6 91.8 91.3 –
–46.1 13.4 66.4 145.1
V
–1
∆ f H /kJ mol
V
–1
∆ diss H (E–H)/kJ mol
389
322
297
255
BiH 3
–
278
–
(ii) Reactivity towards oxygen: All these elements form two types
of oxides: E 2 O 3 and E 2 O 5 . The oxide in the higher oxidation state
of the element is more acidic than that of lower oxidation state.
Their acidic character decreases down the group. The oxides of
the type E 2 O 3 of nitrogen and phosphorus are purely acidic,
that of arsenic and antimony amphoteric and those of bismuth
predominantly basic.
(iii) Reactivity towards halogens: These elements react to form two
series of halides: EX 3 and EX 5 . Nitrogen does not form
pentahalide due to non-availability of the d orbitals in its valence
shell. Pentahalides are more covalent than trihalides. All the
trihalides of these elements except those of nitrogen are stable.
In case of nitrogen, only NF 3 is known to be stable. Trihalides
except BiF 3 are predominantly covalent in nature.
(iv) Reactivity towards metals: All these elements react with metals
to form their binary compounds exhibiting –3 oxidation state,
such as, Ca 3 N 2 (calcium nitride) Ca 3 P 2 (calcium phosphide),
Na 3 As 2 (sodium arsenide), Zn 3 Sb 2 (zinc antimonide) and Mg 3 Bi 2
(magnesium bismuthide).
Chemistry 168Though nitrogen exhibits +5 oxidation state, it does not form
pentahalide. Give reason. Example 7.1
Nitrogen with n = 2, has s and p orbitals only. It does not have d
orbitals to expand its covalence beyond four. That is why it does not
form pentahalide. Solution
PH 3 has lower boiling point than NH 3 . Why? Example 7.2
Solution
Unlike NH 3 , PH 3 molecules are not associated through hydrogen bonding
in liquid state. That is why the boiling point of PH 3 is lower than NH 3 .
Intext Questions
7.1 Why are pentahalides more covalent than trihalides ?
7.2 Why is BiH 3 the strongest reducing agent amongst all the hydrides of
Group 15 elements ?
7.2 Dinitrogen
Preparation
Dinitrogen is produced commercially by the liquefaction and fractional
distillation of air. Liquid dinitrogen (b.p. 77.2 K) distils out first leaving
behind liquid oxygen (b.p. 90 K).
In the laboratory, dinitrogen is prepared by treating an aqueous
solution of ammonium chloride with sodium nitrite.
NH 4 CI(aq) + NaNO 2 (aq) → N 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(l) + NaCl (aq)
Small amounts of NO and HNO 3 are also formed in this reaction;
these impurities can be removed by passing the gas through aqueous
sulphuric acid containing potassium dichromate. It can also be obtained
by the thermal decomposition of ammonium dichromate.
Heat
→ N 2 + 4H 2 O + Cr 2 O 3
(NH 4 ) 2 Cr 2 O 7 
Very pure nitrogen can be obtained by the thermal decomposition
of sodium or barium azide.
Ba(N 3 ) 2 → Ba + 3N 2
Properties
Dinitrogen is a colourless, odourless, tasteless and non-toxic gas.
14
15
Nitrogen atom has two stable isotopes: N and N. It has a very low
3
solubility in water (23.2 cm per litre of water at 273 K and 1 bar
pressure) and low freezing and boiling points (Table 7.1).
Dinitrogen is rather inert at room temperature because of the high
bond enthalpy of N ≡N bond. Reactivity, however, increases rapidly with
rise in temperature. At higher temperatures, it directly combines with
some metals to form predominantly ionic nitrides and with non-metals,
covalent nitrides. A few typical reactions are:
Heat
→ 2Li 3 N
6Li + N 2 
Heat
→ Mg 3 N 2
3Mg + N 2 
169 The p-Block ElementsIt combines with hydrogen at about 773 K in the presence of a
catalyst (Haber’s Process) to form ammonia:
773 k
N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) ↽

⇀
 2NH 3 (g);
y
∆ f H
= –46.1 kJmol
–1
Dinitrogen combines with dioxygen only at very high temperature
(at about 2000 K) to form nitric oxide, NO.
Heat
N 2 + O 2 (g) ↽

⇀
 2NO(g)
Uses
Uses: The main use of dinitrogen is in the manufacture of ammonia and other
industrial chemicals containing nitrogen, (e.g., calcium cyanamide). It also
finds use where an inert atmosphere is required (e.g., in iron and steel industry,
inert diluent for reactive chemicals). Liquid dinitrogen is used as a refrigerant
to preserve biological materials, food items and in cryosurgery.
Example 7.3 Write the reaction of thermal decomposition of sodium azide.
Solution Thermal decomposition of sodium azide gives dinitrogen gas.
2NaN 3 → 2Na + 3N 2
Intext Question
7.3 Why is N 2 less reactive at room temperature?
7.3 Ammonia
Preparation
Ammonia is present in small quantities in air and soil where it is
formed by the decay of nitrogenous organic matter e.g., urea.
NH 2 CONH 2 + 2H 2 O → ( NH 4 ) 2 CO 3 ⇌ 2NH 3 + H 2 O + CO 2
On a small scale ammonia is obtained from ammonium salts which
decompose when treated with caustic soda or calcium hydroxide.
2NH 4 Cl + Ca(OH) 2 → 2NH 3 + 2H 2 O + CaCl 2
(NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 + 2NaOH → 2NH 3 + 2H 2 O + Na 2 SO 4
On a large scale, ammonia is manufactured by Haber’s process.
0
–1
N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) Ö 2NH 3 (g);
∆ f H = – 46.1 kJ mol
In accordance with Le Chatelier’s principle, high pressure would
favour the formation of ammonia. The optimum conditions for the
5
production of ammonia are a pressure of 200 × 10 Pa (about 200
atm), a temperature of ~ 700 K and the use of a catalyst such as iron
oxide with small amounts of K 2 O and Al 2 O 3 to increase the rate of
attainment of equilibrium. The flow chart for the production of ammonia
is shown in Fig. 7.1. Earlier, iron was used as a catalyst with
molybdenum as a promoter.
Chemistry 170Fig. 7.1
Flow chart for the
manufacture of
ammonia
N
H
H
H
Properties
Ammonia is a colourless gas with a pungent odour. Its freezing and
boiling points are 198.4 and 239.7 K respectively. In the solid and
liquid states, it is associated through hydrogen bonds as in the case
of water and that accounts for its higher melting and boiling points
than expected on the basis of its molecular mass. The ammonia molecule
is trigonal pyramidal with the nitrogen atom at the apex. It has three
bond pairs and one lone pair of electrons as shown in the structure.
Ammonia gas is highly soluble in water. Its aqueous solution is
–
weakly basic due to the formation of OH ions.
–
+
NH 3 (g) + H 2 O(l) l NH 4 (aq) + OH (aq)
It forms ammonium salts with acids, e.g., NH 4 Cl, (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , etc. As
a weak base, it precipitates the hydroxides (hydrated oxides in case of
some metals) of many metals from their salt solutions. For example,
ZnSO 4 ( aq ) + 2NH 4 OH ( aq ) → Zn ( OH ) 2 ( s ) + ( NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 ( aq )
( white ppt )
FeCl 3 ( aq ) + NH 4 OH ( aq ) → Fe 2 O 3 . x H 2 O ( s ) + NH 4 Cl ( aq )
( brown ppt )
The presence of a lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom of
the ammonia molecule makes it a Lewis base. It donates the electron
pair and forms linkage with metal ions and the formation of such
complex compounds finds applications in detection of metal ions
2+
+
such as Cu , Ag :
2+
2+
Cu (aq) + 4 NH 3 (aq) Ö [Cu(NH 3 ) 4 ] (aq)
(blue)
Ag
+
( aq )
(deep blue)
+ Cl
(colourless)
−
( aq )
→ AgCl ( s )
(white ppt)
AgCl ( s ) + 2NH 3 ( aq ) →   Ag ( NH 3 ) 2   Cl ( aq )
(white ppt)
(colourless)
171 The p-Block ElementsUses
Uses: Ammonia is used to produce various nitrogenous fertilisers
(ammonium nitrate, urea, ammonium phosphate and ammonium sulphate)
and in the manufacture of some inorganic nitrogen compounds, the most
important one being nitric acid. Liquid ammonia is also used as a refrigerant.
Example 7.4 Why does NH 3 act as a Lewis base ?
Solution Nitrogen atom in NH 3 has one lone pair of electrons which
is available for donation. Therefore, it acts as a Lewis base.
Intext Questions
7.4 Mention the conditions required to maximise the yield of ammonia.
2+
7.5 How does ammonia react with a solution of Cu ?
7.4 Oxides of
Nitrogen
Nitrogen forms a number of oxides in different oxidation states. The
names, formulas, preparation and physical appearance of these oxides
are given in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3: Oxides of Nitrogen
Name
Dinitrogen oxide
Formula
Oxidation
state of
nitrogen
N 2 O + 1
NO + 2
[Nitrogen(I) oxide]
Nitrogen monoxide
[Nitrogen(II) oxide]
Common
methods of
preparation
Heat
NH 4 NO 3 →
N 2 O + 2H 2 O
Physical
appearance and
chemical nature
colourless gas,
neutral
2NaNO 2 + 2FeSO 4 + 3H 2 SO 4 colourless gas,
→ Fe 2 ( SO 4 ) 3 + 2NaHSO 4 neutral
+ 2H 2 O + 2NO
Dinitrogen trioxide
N 2 O 3
+ 3
250 K
2NO + N 2 O 4 
→ 2N 2 O 3
[Nitrogen(III) oxide]
acidic
Nitrogen dioxide
[Nitrogen(IV) oxide] NO 2 + 4
Dinitrogen tetroxide N 2 O 4 + 4
N 2 O 5 +5
673K
2Pb ( NO 3 ) 2 
→
4NO 2 + 2PbO + O 2
Cool

⇀
2NO 2 ↽
 N 2 O 4
Heat
[Nitrogen(IV) oxide]
Dinitrogen pentoxide
[Nitrogen(V) oxide]
Chemistry 172
blue solid,
4HNO 3 + P 4 O 10
→ 4HPO 3 + 2N 2 O 5
brown gas,
acidic
colourless solid/
liquid, acidic
colourless solid,
acidicLewis dot main resonance structures and bond parameters of oxides
are given in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4: Structures of Oxides of Nitrogen
Example 7.5
NO 2 contains odd number of valence electrons. It behaves as a typical Solution
Why does NO 2 dimerise ?
odd molecule. On dimerisation, it is converted to stable N 2 O 4 molecule
with even number of electrons.
Intext Question
7.6 What is the covalence of nitrogen in N 2 O 5 ?
7.5 Nitric Acid
Nitrogen forms oxoacids such as H 2 N 2 O 2 (hyponitrous acid), HNO 2
(nitrous acid) and HNO 3 (nitric acid). Amongst them HNO 3 is the
most important.
173 The p-Block ElementsPreparation
In the laboratory, nitric acid is prepared by heating KNO 3 or NaNO 3
and concentrated H 2 SO 4 in a glass retort.
NaNO 3 + H 2 SO 4 → NaHSO 4 + HNO 3
On a large scale it is prepared mainly by Ostwald’s process.
This method is based upon catalytic oxidation of NH 3 by atmospheric
oxygen.
Pt / Rh gauge catalyst
4NH 3 ( g ) + 5O 2 ( g ) 
→ 4NO ( g ) + 6H 2 O ( g )
500 K , 9 bar
(from air)
Nitric oxide thus formed combines with oxygen giving NO 2 .
2NO ( g ) + O 2 ( g ) ⇌ 2NO 2 ( g )
Nitrogen dioxide so formed, dissolves in water to give HNO 3 .
3NO 2 ( g ) + H 2 O ( l ) → 2HNO 3 ( aq ) + NO ( g )
NO thus formed is recycled and the aqueous HNO 3 can be
concentrated by distillation upto ~ 68% by mass. Further
concentration to 98% can be achieved by dehydration with
concentrated H 2 SO 4 .
Properties
It is a colourless liquid (f.p. 231.4 K and b.p. 355.6 K). Laboratory
grade nitric acid contains ~ 68% of the HNO 3 by mass and has a
specific gravity of 1.504.
In the gaseous state, HNO 3 exists as a planar molecule
with the structure as shown.
In aqueous solution, nitric acid behaves as a strong acid giving
hydronium and nitrate ions.
+
–
HNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) → H 3 O (aq) + NO 3 (aq)
Concentrated nitric acid is a strong oxidising agent and attacks
most metals except noble metals such as gold and platinum. The
products of oxidation depend upon the concentration of the acid,
temperature and the nature of the material undergoing oxidation.
3Cu + 8 HNO 3 (dilute) → 3Cu(NO 3 ) 2 + 2NO + 4H 2 O
Cu + 4HNO 3 (conc.) → Cu(NO 3 ) 2 + 2NO 2 + 2H 2 O
Zinc reacts with dilute nitric acid to give N 2 O and with concentrated
acid to give NO 2 .
4Zn + 10HNO 3 (dilute) → 4 Zn (NO 3 ) 2 + 5H 2 O + N 2 O
Zn + 4HNO 3 (conc.) → Zn (NO 3 ) 2 + 2H 2 O + 2NO 2
Some metals (e.g., Cr, Al) do not dissolve in concentrated nitric
acid because of the formation of a passive film of oxide on the surface.
Concentrated nitric acid also oxidises non–metals and their
compounds. Iodine is oxidised to iodic acid, carbon to carbon dioxide,
sulphur to H 2 SO 4 , and phosphorus to phosphoric acid.
Chemistry 174I 2 + 10HNO 3 → 2HIO 3 + 10NO 2 + 4H 2 O
C + 4HNO 3 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O + 4NO 2
S 8 + 48HNO 3 → 8H 2 SO 4 + 48NO 2 + 16H 2 O
P 4 + 20HNO 3 → 4H 3 PO 4 + 20NO 2 + 4H 2 O
Brown Ring Test: The familiar brown ring test for nitrates depends
2+
on the ability of Fe to reduce nitrates to nitric oxide, which reacts
2+
with Fe to form a brown coloured complex. The test is usually carried
out by adding dilute ferrous sulphate solution to an aqueous solution
containing nitrate ion, and then carefully adding concentrated sulphuric
acid along the sides of the test tube. A brown ring at the interface
between the solution and sulphuric acid layers indicates the presence
of nitrate ion in solution.
-
2+
+
3+
NO 3 + 3Fe + 4H → NO + 3Fe + 2H 2 O
[ Fe ( H 2 O ) 6 ] 2 + + NO → [Fe (H 2 O) 5 (NO)]
2+
+ H 2 O
(brown)
Uses
Uses: The major use of nitric acid is in the manufacture of ammonium nitrate
for fertilisers and other nitrates for use in explosives and pyrotechnics. It is
also used for the preparation of nitroglycerin, trinitrotoluene and other organic
nitro compounds. Other major uses are in the pickling of stainless steel,
etching of metals and as an oxidiser in rocket fuels.
7.6 Phosphorus —
Allotropic
Forms
Phosphorus is found in many allotropic forms, the important ones
being white, red and black.
White phosphorus is a translucent white waxy solid. It is poisonous,
insoluble in water but soluble in carbon disulphide and glows in dark
(chemiluminescence). It dissolves in boiling NaOH solution in an inert
atmosphere giving PH 3 .
P 4 + 3NaOH + 3H 2 O → PH 3 + 3NaH 2 PO 2
( sodium hypophosphite )
P
60°
P
P
P
Fig. 7.2
White phosphorus
White phosphorus is less stable and therefore, more reactive than
the other solid phases under normal conditions because of angular
strain in the P 4 molecule where the angles are only 60°. It readily
catches fire in air to give dense white fumes of P 4 O 10 .
P 4 + 5O 2 → P 4 O 10
It consists of discrete tetrahedral P 4 molecule as shown in Fig. 7.2.
Red phosphorus is obtained by heating white phosphorus at 573K
in an inert atmosphere for several days. When red phosphorus is heated
under high pressure, a series of phases of black phosphorus is formed.
Red phosphorus possesses iron grey lustre. It is odourless, non-
poisonous and insoluble in water as well as in carbon disulphide.
Chemically, red phosphorus is much less reactive than white
phosphorus. It does not glow in the dark.
175 The p-Block ElementsIt is polymeric, consisting of chains of P 4
tetrahedra linked together in the manner as shown
in Fig. 7.3.
P
P
P
P
P
Black phosphorus has two forms α-black
phosphorus and β-black phosphorus. α-Black
P
P
P
phosphorus is formed when red phosphorus is
heated in a sealed tube at 803K. It can be sublimed
Fig.7.3: Red phosphorus
in air and has opaque monoclinic or rhombohedral
crystals. It does not oxidise in air. β-Black phosphorus is prepared by
heating white phosphorus at 473 K under high pressure. It does not
burn in air upto 673 K.
P
P
P
7.7 Phosphine
P
Preparation
Phosphine is prepared by the reaction of calcium phosphide with water
or dilute HCl.
Ca 3 P 2 + 6H 2 O → 3Ca(OH) 2 + 2PH 3
Ca 3 P 2 + 6HCl → 3CaCl 2 + 2PH 3
In the laboratory, it is prepared by heating white phosphorus with
concentrated NaOH solution in an inert atmosphere of CO 2 .
P 4 + 3NaOH + 3H 2 O → PH 3 + 3NaH 2 PO 2
( sodium hypophosphite )
When pure, it is non inflammable but becomes inflammable owing
to the presence of P 2 H 4 or P 4 vapours. To purify it from the impurities,
it is absorbed in HI to form phosphonium iodide (PH 4 I) which on treating
with KOH gives off phosphine.
PH 4 I + KOH → KI + H 2 O + PH 3
Properties
It is a colourless gas with rotten fish smell and is highly poisonous.
It explodes in contact with traces of oxidising agents like HNO 3 , Cl 2 and
Br 2 vapours.
It is slightly soluble in water. The solution of PH 3 in water decomposes
in presence of light giving red phosphorus and H 2 . When absorbed in
copper sulphate or mercuric chloride solution, the corresponding
phosphides are obtained.
3CuSO 4 + 2PH 3 → Cu 3 P 2 + 3H 2 SO 4
3HgCl 2 + 2PH 3 → Hg 3 P 2 + 6HCl
Phosphine is weakly basic and like ammonia, gives phosphonium
compounds with acids e.g.,
PH 3 + HBr → PH 4 Br
Uses
Uses: The spontaneous combustion of phosphine is technically used in Holme’s
signals. Containers containing calcium carbide and calcium phosphide are
pierced and thrown in the sea when the gases evolved burn and serve as a
signal. It is also used in smoke screens.
Chemistry 176Example 7.6
PH 3 reacts with acids like HI to form PH 4 I which shows that Solution
In what way can it be proved that PH 3 is basic in nature?
it is basic in nature.
PH 3 + HI → PH 4 I
Due to lone pair on phosphorus atom, PH 3 is acting as a
Lewis base in the above reaction.
Intext Questions
+
7.7 Bond angle in PH 4 is higher than that in PH 3 . Why?
7.8 What happens when white phosphorus is heated with concentrated NaOH
solution in an inert atmosphere of CO 2 ?
7.8 Phosphorus Halides
7.8.1 Phosphorus
Trichloride
Phosphorus forms two types of halides, PX 3 (X = F, Cl, Br, I) and
PX 5 (X = F, Cl, Br).
Preparation
It is obtained by passing dry chlorine over heated white phosphorus.
P 4 + 6Cl 2 → 4PCl 3
It is also obtained by the action of thionyl chloride with white
phosphorus.
P 4 + 8SOCl 2 → 4PCl 3 + 4SO 2 + 2S 2 Cl 2
Properties
It is a colourless oily liquid and hydrolyses in the presence of moisture.
PCl 3 + 3H 2 O → H 3 PO 3 + 3HCl
It reacts with organic compounds containing –OH group such as
CH 3 COOH, C 2 H 5 OH.
P
Cl
3CH 3 COOH + PCl 3 → 3CH 3 COCl + H 3 PO 3
3C 2 H 5 OH + PCl 3 → 3C 2 H 5 Cl + H 3 PO 3
Cl
Cl
7.8.2 Phosphorus
Pentachloride
It has a pyramidal shape as shown, in which phosphorus is sp
hybridised.
3
Preparation
Phosphorus pentachloride is prepared by the reaction of white
phosphorus with excess of dry chlorine.
P 4 + 10Cl 2 → 4PCl 5
It can also be prepared by the action of SO 2 Cl 2 on phosphorus.
P 4 + 10SO 2 Cl 2 → 4PCl 5 + 10SO 2
Properties
PCl 5 is a yellowish white powder and in moist air, it hydrolyses to
POCl 3 and finally gets converted to phosphoric acid.
PCl 5 + H 2 O → POCl 3 + 2HCl
POCl 3 + 3H 2 O → H 3 PO 4 + 3HCl
177 The p-Block ElementsWhen heated, it sublimes but decomposes on stronger heating.
Heat
PCl 5 
→ PCl 3 + Cl 2
It reacts with organic compounds containing –OH group converting
them to chloro derivatives.
C 2 H 5 OH + PCl 5 → C 2 H 5 Cl + POCl 3 + HCl
CH 3 COOH + PCl 5 → CH 3 COCl + POCl 3 +HCl
Finely divided metals on heating with PCl 5 give corresponding
chlorides.
2Ag + PCl 5 → 2AgCl + PCl 3
Sn + 2PCl 5 → SnCl 4 + 2PCl 3
Cl
Cl
202
P
Cl
pm
Cl
Cl
It is used in the synthesis of some organic
compounds, e.g., C 2 H 5 Cl, CH 3 COCl.
In gaseous and liquid phases, it has a trigonal
bipyramidal structure as shown. The three equatorial
P–Cl bonds are equivalent, while the two axial bonds are
longer than equatorial bonds. This is due to the fact that
the axial bond pairs suffer more repulsion as compared
to equatorial bond pairs.
In the solid state it exists as an ionic solid,
+
–
+
[PCl 4 ] [PCl 6 ] in which the cation, [PCl 4 ] is tetrahedral
–
and the anion, [PCl 6 ] octahedral.
Example 7.7 Why does PCl 3 fume in moisture ?
Solution PCl 3 hydrolyses in the presence of moisture giving fumes of HCl.
PCl 3 + 3H 2 O → H 3 PO 3 + 3HCl
Example 7.8 Are all the five bonds in PCl 5 molecule equivalent? Justify your answer.
Solution PCl 5 has a trigonal bipyramidal structure and the three equatorial
P-Cl bonds are equivalent, while the two axial bonds are different and
longer than equatorial bonds.
Intext Questions
7.9 What happens when PCl 5 is heated?
7.10 Write a balanced equation for the hydrolytic reaction of PCl 5 in heavy water.
7.9 Oxoacids of
Phosphorus
Chemistry 178
Phosphorus forms a number of oxoacids. The important oxoacids of
phosphorus with their formulas, methods of preparation and the
presence of some characteristic bonds in their structures are given
in Table 7.5.Table 7.5: Oxoacids of Phosphorus
Name
*
Formula
Oxidation
state of
phosphorus
Characteristic
bonds and their
number
Preparation
Hypophosphorous
(Phosphinic) H 3 PO 2 +1 One P – OH
Two P – H
One P = O white P 4 + alkali
Orthophosphorous
(Phosphonic) H 3 PO 3 +3 Two P – OH
One P – H
One P = O P 2 O 3 + H 2 O
Pyrophosphorous H 4 P 2 O 5 +3 Two P – OH
Two P – H
Two P = O PCl 3 + H 3 PO 3
Hypophosphoric H 4 P 2 O 6 +4 Four P – OH
Two P = O
One P – P red P 4 + alkali
Orthophosphoric H 3 PO 4 +5 Three P – OH
One P = O P 4 O 10 +H 2 O
Pyrophosphoric H 4 P 2 O 7 +5 Four P – OH
Two P = O
One P – O – P heat phosphoric
acid
Metaphosphoric* (HPO 3 ) n +5 Three P – OH
Three P = O
Three P – O – P phosphorus acid
+ Br 2 , heat in a
sealed tube
Exists in polymeric forms only. Characteristic bonds of (HPO 3 ) 3 have been given in the Table.
The compositions of the oxoacids are interrelated in terms of loss
or gain of H 2 O molecule or O-atom.
The structures of some important oxoacids are given below:
O
O
O
P
HO
P
OH
OH
H 3 PO 4
Orthophosphoric acid
O
P
P
HO
O
O
HO
O
P
O
H 3 PO 2
Hypophosphorous acid
OH
O
OH
O
H
O
P
OH
H
H 3 PO 3
Orthophosphorous acid
O
P
Fig. 7.4
Structures of some
important oxoacids of
phosphorus
OH
OH
OH
H 4 P 2 O 7
Pyrophosphoric acid
P
H
OH
OH
O
P
P
O
O
OH
O
P
O
O
O
OH
OH
Cyclotrimetaphosphoric acid, (HPO 3 ) 3
Polymetaphosphoric acid, (HPO 3 ) n
179 The p-Block ElementsIn oxoacids phosphorus is tetrahedrally surrounded by other atoms.
All these acids contain at least one P=O bond and one P–OH bond. The
oxoacids in which phosphorus has lower oxidation state (less than +5)
contain, in addition to P=O and P–OH bonds, either P–P (e.g., in H 4 P 2 O 6 )
or P–H (e.g., in H 3 PO 2 ) bonds but not both. These acids in +3 oxidation
state of phosphorus tend to disproportionate to higher and lower
oxidation states. For example, orthophophorous acid (or phosphorous
acid) on heating disproportionates to give orthophosphoric acid (or
phosphoric acid) and phosphine.
4H 3 PO 3 → 3H 3 PO 4 + PH 3
The acids which contain P–H bond have strong reducing properties.
Thus, hypophosphorous acid is a good reducing agent as it contains
two P–H bonds and reduces, for example, AgNO 3 to metallic silver.
4 AgNO 3 + 2H 2 O + H 3 PO 2 → 4Ag + 4HNO 3 + H 3 PO 4
+
These P–H bonds are not ionisable to give H and do not play any
role in basicity. Only those H atoms which are attached with oxygen in
P–OH form are ionisable and cause the basicity. Thus, H 3 PO 3 and
H 3 PO 4 are dibasic and tribasic, respectively as the structure of H 3 PO 3
has two P–OH bonds and H 3 PO 4 three.
Example 7.9 How do you account for the reducing behaviour
of H 3 PO 2 on the basis of its structure ?
Solution In H 3 PO 2 , two H atoms are bonded directly to P
atom which imparts reducing character to the acid.
Intext Questions
7.11 What is the basicity of H 3 PO 4 ?
7.12 What happens when H 3 PO 3 is heated?
7.10 Group 16
Elements Oxygen, sulphur, selenium, tellurium and polonium constitute Group
16 of the periodic table. This is sometimes known as group of
chalcogens. The name is derived from the Greek word for brass and
points to the association of sulphur and its congeners with copper.
Most copper minerals contain either oxygen or sulphur and frequently
the other members of the group.
7.10.1 Occurrence Oxygen is the most abundant of all the elements on earth. Oxygen
forms about 46.6% by mass of earth’s crust. Dry air contains 20.946%
oxygen by volume.
However, the abundance of sulphur in the earth’s crust is only
0.03-0.1%. Combined sulphur exists primarily as sulphates such as
gypsum CaSO 4 .2H 2 O, epsom salt MgSO 4 .7H 2 O, baryte BaSO 4 and
sulphides such as galena PbS, zinc blende ZnS, copper pyrites CuFeS 2 .
Traces of sulphur occur as hydrogen sulphide in volcanoes. Organic
materials such as eggs, proteins, garlic, onion, mustard, hair and wool
contain sulphur.
Chemistry 180Selenium and tellurium are also found as metal selenides and
tellurides in sulphide ores. Polonium occurs in nature as a decay
product of thorium and uranium minerals.
The important atomic and physical properties of Group16 along
with electronic configuration are given in Table 7.6. Some of the atomic,
physical and chemical properties and their trends are discussed below.
7.10.2 Electronic
Configuration The elements of Group16 have six electrons in the outermost shell and
2
4
have ns np general electronic configuration.
7.10.3 Atomic
and Ionic
Radii Due to increase in the number of shells, atomic and ionic radii increase
from top to bottom in the group. The size of oxygen atom is, however,
exceptionally small.
7.10.4 Ionisation
Enthalpy Ionisation enthalpy decreases down the group. It is due to increase in
size. However, the elements of this group have lower ionisation enthalpy
values compared to those of Group15 in the corresponding periods.
This is due to the fact that Group 15 elements have extra stable half-
filled p orbitals electronic configurations.
7.10.5 Electron
Gain
Enthalpy Because of the compact nature of oxygen atom, it has less negative
electron gain enthalpy than sulphur. However, from sulphur onwards
the value again becomes less negative upto polonium.
7.10.6
Electronegativity Next to fluorine, oxygen has the highest electronegativity value amongst
the elements. Within the group, electronegativity decreases with an
increase in atomic number. This implies that the metallic character
increases from oxygen to polonium.
Elements of Group 16 generally show lower value of first ionisation
enthalpy compared to the corresponding periods of group 15. Why? Example 7.10
Due to extra stable half-filled p orbitals electronic configurations of
Group 15 elements, larger amount of energy is required to remove
electrons compared to Group 16 elements. Solution
7.10.7 Physical
Properties Some of the physical properties of Group 16 elements are given in
Table 7.6. Oxygen and sulphur are non-metals, selenium and tellurium
metalloids, whereas polonium is a metal. Polonium is radioactive and
is short lived (Half-life 13.8 days). All these elements exhibit allotropy.
The melting and boiling points increase with an increase in atomic
number down the group. The large difference between the melting and
boiling points of oxygen and sulphur may be explained on the basis
of their atomicity; oxygen exists as diatomic molecule (O 2 ) whereas
sulphur exists as polyatomic molecule (S 8 ).
7.10.8 Chemical
Properties Oxidation states and trends in chemical reactivity
The elements of Group 16 exhibit a number of oxidation states (Table
7.6). The stability of -2 oxidation state decreases down the group.
Polonium hardly shows –2 oxidation state. Since electronegativity of
oxygen is very high, it shows only negative oxidation state as –2 except
181 The p-Block ElementsTable 7.6: Some Physical Properties of Group 16 Elements
Property
O
Atomic number
Atomic mass/g mol
8
–1
Covalent radius/(pm)
4
52
78.96
2
4
Po
84
127.60
10
2
4
10
210.00
2
4
14
4
[Ar]3d 4s 4p [Kr]4d 5s 5p [Xe]4f 5d 6s 6p
104 117 137 146
140 184 198 221 230
Electron gain enthalpy, –141 –200 –195 –190 –174
1314 1000 941 869 813
3.50 2.58 2.55 2.01 1.76
b
–1
Ionisation enthalpy (∆ i H 1 )
/kJ mol
2
[Ne]3s 3p 66
/∆ eg H kJ mol
10
[He]2s 2p Ionic radius, E /pm
2–
–1
Electronegativity
–3
c
d
e
Density /g cm (298 K) 1.32 2.06 4.19 6.25 –
Melting point/K 55 393 f 490 725 520
Boiling point/K 90 718 958 1260 1235
Oxidation states* –2,–1,1,2 –2,2,4,6 –2,2,4,6 –2,2,4,6 2,4
b
c
Single bond; Approximate value; At the melting point;
*
Te
34
32.06
2
a
Se
16
16.00
Electronic configuration
a
S
d
e
f
Rhombic sulphur; Hexagonal grey; Monoclinic form, 673 K.
Oxygen shows oxidation states of +2 and +1 in oxygen fluorides OF 2 and O 2 F 2 respectively.
in the case of OF 2 where its oxidation state is + 2. Other elements of the
group exhibit + 2, + 4, + 6 oxidation states but + 4 and + 6 are more
common. Sulphur, selenium and tellurium usually show + 4 oxidation
state in their compounds with oxygen and + 6 with fluorine. The stability
of + 6 oxidation state decreases down the group and stability of + 4
oxidation state increases (inert pair effect). Bonding in +4 and +6
oxidation states is primarily covalent.
Anomalous behaviour of oxygen
The anomalous behaviour of oxygen, like other members of p-block
present in second period is due to its small size and high
electronegativity. One typical example of effects of small size and high
electronegativity is the presence of strong hydrogen bonding in H 2 O
which is not found in H 2 S.
The absence of d orbitals in oxygen limits its covalency to four and
in practice, rarely exceeds two. On the other hand, in case of other
elements of the group, the valence shells can be expanded and covalence
exceeds four.
(i) Reactivity with hydrogen: All the elements of Group 16 form
hydrides of the type H 2 E (E = O, S, Se, Te, Po). Some properties of
hydrides are given in Table 7.7. Their acidic character increases
from H 2 O to H 2 Te. The increase in acidic character can be explained
in terms of decrease in bond enthalpy for the dissociation of H–E
bond down the group. Owing to the decrease in enthalpy for the
dissociation of H–E bond down the group, the thermal stability of
hydrides also decreases from H 2 O to H 2 Po. All the hydrides except
water possess reducing property and this character increases from
H 2 S to H 2 Te.
Chemistry 182Table 7.7: Properties of Hydrides of Group 16 Elements
Property H 2 O H 2 S H 2 Se H 2 Te
m.p/K 273 188 208 222
b.p/K 373 213 232 269
H–E distance/pm 96 134 146 169
104 92 91 90
–286 –20 73 100
HEH angle (°)
–1
∆ f H/kJ mol
–1
∆ diss H (H–E)/kJ mol
Dissociation constant
a
463
a
1.8×10
347
–16
276
1.3×10
–7
238
–4
1.3×10
2.3×10
–3
Aqueous solution, 298 K
(ii) Reactivity with oxygen: All these elements form oxides of the EO 2
and EO 3 types where E = S, Se, Te or Po. Ozone (O 3 ) and sulphur
dioxide (SO 2 ) are gases while selenium dioxide (SeO 2 ) is solid.
Reducing property of dioxide decreases from SO 2 to TeO 2 ; SO 2 is
reducing while TeO 2 is an oxidising agent. Besides EO 2 type,
sulphur, selenium and tellurium also form EO 3 type oxides (SO 3 ,
SeO 3 , TeO 3 ). Both types of oxides are acidic in nature.
(iii) Reactivity towards the halogens: Elements of Group 16 form a large
number of halides of the type, EX 6 , EX 4 and EX 2 where E is an
element of the group and X is a halogen. The stability of the halides
–
–
–
–
decreases in the order F > Cl > Br > I . Amongst hexahalides,
hexafluorides are the only stable halides. All hexafluorides are
gaseous in nature. They have octahedral structure. Sulphur
hexafluoride, SF 6 is exceptionally stable for steric reasons.
Amongst tetrafluorides, SF 4 is a gas, SeF 4 a liquid and TeF 4 a solid.
3
These fluorides have sp d hybridisation and thus, have trigonal
bipyramidal structures in which one of the equatorial positions is
occupied by a lone pair of electrons. This geometry is also regarded as
see-saw geometry.
All elements except oxygen form dichlorides and dibromides. These
3
dihalides are formed by sp hybridisation and thus, have tetrahedral
structure. The well known monohalides are dimeric in nature. Examples
are S 2 F 2 , S 2 Cl 2 , S 2 Br 2 , Se 2 Cl 2 and Se 2 Br 2 . These dimeric halides undergo
disproportionation as given below:
2Se 2 Cl 2 → SeCl 4 + 3Se
Example 7.11
Due to the decrease in bond (E–H) dissociation Solution
H 2 S is less acidic than H 2 Te. Why?
enthalpy down the group, acidic character increases.
Intext Questions
7.13 List the important sources of sulphur.
7.14 Write the order of thermal stability of the hydrides of Group 16 elements.
7.15 Why is H 2 O a liquid and H 2 S a gas ?
183 The p-Block Elements7.11 Dioxygen
Preparation
Dioxygen can be obtained in the laboratory by the following ways:
(i) By heating oxygen containing salts such as chlorates, nitrates and
permanganates.
Heat
2KClO 3 
→ 2KCl + 3O 2
MnO
2
(ii) By the thermal decomposition of the oxides of metals low in the
electrochemical series and higher oxides of some metals.
2Ag 2 O(s) → 4Ag(s) + O 2 (g);
2Pb 3 O 4 (s) → 6PbO(s) + O 2 (g)
2HgO(s) → 2Hg(l) + O 2 (g) ;
2PbO 2 (s) → 2PbO(s) + O 2 (g)
(iii) Hydrogen peroxide is readily decomposed into water and dioxygen
by catalysts such as finely divided metals and manganese dioxide.
2H 2 O 2 (aq) → 2H 2 O(1) + O 2 (g)
On large scale it can be prepared from water or air. Electrolysis of
water leads to the release of hydrogen at the cathode and oxygen
at the anode.
Industrially, dioxygen is obtained from air by first removing carbon
dioxide and water vapour and then, the remaining gases are liquefied
and fractionally distilled to give dinitrogen and dioxygen.
Properties
Dioxygen is a colourless and odourless gas. Its solubility in water is to
3
3
the extent of 3.08 cm in 100 cm water at 293 K which is just sufficient
for the vital support of marine and aquatic life. It liquefies at 90 K and
16
17
freezes at 55 K. Oxygen atom has three stable isotopes: O, O and
18
O. Molecular oxygen, O 2 is unique in being paramagnetic inspite of
having even number of electrons (see Class XI Chemistry Book, Unit 4).
Dioxygen directly reacts with nearly all metals and non-metals
except some metals ( e.g., Au, Pt) and some noble gases. Its combination
with other elements is often strongly exothermic which helps in
sustaining the reaction. However, to initiate the reaction, some external
heating is required as bond dissociation enthalpy of oxgyen-oxygen
double bond is high (493.4 kJ mol –1 ).
Some of the reactions of dioxygen with metals, non-metals and
other compounds are given below:
2Ca + O 2 → 2CaO
4Al + 3O 2 → 2Al 2 O 3
P 4 + 5O 2 → P 4 O 10
C + O 2 → CO 2
2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2
CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O
Some compounds are catalytically oxidised. For example,
V 2 O 5
2SO 2 + O 2 

→ 2SO 3
CuCl 2
4HCl + O 2 
→ 2Cl 2 + 2H 2 O
Chemistry 184Uses
Uses: In addition to its importance in normal respiration and combustion
processes, oxygen is used in oxyacetylene welding, in the manufacture of
many metals, particularly steel. Oxygen cylinders are widely used in hospitals,
high altitude flying and in mountaineering. The combustion of fuels, e.g.,
hydrazines in liquid oxygen, provides tremendous thrust in rockets.
Intext Questions
7.16
7.17
Which of the following does not react with oxygen directly?
Zn, Ti, Pt, Fe
Complete the following reactions:
(i) C 2 H 4 + O 2 →
(ii) 4Al + 3 O 2 →
7.12 Simple
Oxides
A binary compound of oxygen with another element is called oxide. As
already stated, oxygen reacts with most of the elements of the periodic
table to form oxides. In many cases one element forms two or more
oxides. The oxides vary widely in their nature and properties.
Oxides can be simple (e.g., MgO, Al 2 O 3 ) or mixed (Pb 3 O 4 , Fe 3 O 4 ).
Simple oxides can be classified on the basis of their acidic, basic or
amphoteric character. An oxide that combines with water to give an
acid is termed acidic oxide (e.g., SO 2 , Cl 2 O 7 , CO 2 , N 2 O 5 ). For example,
SO 2 combines with water to give H 2 SO 3 , an acid.
SO 2 + H 2 O → H 2 SO 3
As a general rule, only non-metal oxides are acidic but oxides of
some metals in high oxidation state also have acidic character (e.g.,
Mn 2 O 7 , CrO 3 , V 2 O 5 ). The oxides which give a base with water are known
as basic oxides (e.g., Na 2 O, CaO, BaO). For example, CaO combines
with water to give Ca(OH) 2 , a base.
CaO + H 2 O → Ca ( OH ) 2
In general, metallic oxides are basic.
Some metallic oxides exhibit a dual behaviour. They show
characteristics of both acidic as well as basic oxides. Such oxides are
known as amphoteric oxides. They react with acids as well as alkalies.
For example, Al 2 O 3 reacts with acids as well as alkalies.
3 +
Al 2 O 3 ( s ) + 6HCl ( aq ) + 9H 2 O ( l ) → 2 [ Al(H 2 O) 6 ]
( aq ) + 6Cl − ( aq )
Al 2 O 3 ( s ) + 6NaOH ( aq ) + 3H 2 O ( l ) → 2Na 3 [ Al ( OH ) 6 ] ( aq )
7.13 Ozone
There are some oxides which are neither acidic nor basic. Such oxides
are known as neutral oxides. Examples of neutral oxides are CO, NO
and N 2 O.
Ozone is an allotropic form of oxygen. It is too reactive to remain for
long in the atmosphere at sea level. At a height of about 20 kilometres,
it is formed from atmospheric oxygen in the presence of sunlight. This
ozone layer protects the earth’s surface from an excessive concentration
of ultraviolet (UV) radiations.
185 The p-Block ElementsPreparation
When a slow dry stream of oxygen is passed through a silent electrical
discharge, conversion of oxygen to ozone (10%) occurs. The product is
known as ozonised oxygen.
V
–1
3O 2 → 2O 3 ∆H (298 K) = +142 kJ mol
Since the formation of ozone from oxygen is an endothermic process,
it is necessary to use a silent electrical discharge in its preparation to
prevent its decomposition.
If concentrations of ozone greater than 10 per cent are required, a
battery of ozonisers can be used, and pure ozone (b.p. 101.1K) can be
condensed in a vessel surrounded by liquid oxygen.
Properties
Pure ozone is a pale blue gas, dark blue liquid and violet-black solid.
Ozone has a characteristic smell and in small concentrations it is harmless.
However, if the concentration rises above about 100 parts per million,
breathing becomes uncomfortable resulting in headache and nausea.
Ozone is thermodynamically unstable with respect to oxygen since
its decomposition into oxygen results in the liberation of heat (∆H is
negative) and an increase in entropy (∆S is positive). These two effects
reinforce each other, resulting in large negative Gibbs energy change
(∆G) for its conversion into oxygen. It is not really surprising, therefore,
high concentrations of ozone can be dangerously explosive.
Due to the ease with which it liberates atoms of nascent oxygen
(O 3 → O 2 + O), it acts as a powerful oxidising agent. For example, it
oxidises lead sulphide to lead sulphate and iodide ions to iodine.
PbS(s) + 4O 3 (g) → PbSO 4 (s) + 4O 2 (g)
2I – (aq) + H 2 O(l) + O 3 (g) → 2OH – (aq) + I 2 (s) + O 2 (g)
When ozone reacts with an excess of potassium iodide solution
buffered with a borate buffer (pH 9.2), iodine is liberated which can be
titrated against a standard solution of sodium thiosulphate. This is a
quantitative method for estimating O 3 gas.
Experiments have shown that nitrogen oxides (particularly nitric
oxide) combine very rapidly with ozone and there is, thus, the possibility
that nitrogen oxides emitted from the exhaust systems of supersonic
jet aeroplanes might be slowly depleting the concentration of the ozone
layer in the upper atmosphere.
NO ( g ) + O 3 ( g ) → NO 2 ( g ) + O 2 ( g )
Another threat to this ozone layer is probably posed by the use of
freons which are used in aerosol sprays and as refrigerants.
The two oxygen-oxygen bond lengths in the ozone
molecule are identical (128 pm) and the molecule is angular
o
as expected with a bond angle of about 117 . It is a resonance
hybrid of two main forms:
Uses
Uses: It is used as a germicide, disinfectant and for sterilising water. It is also
used for bleaching oils, ivory, flour, starch, etc. It acts as an oxidising agent
in the manufacture of potassium permanganate.
Chemistry 186Intext Questions
7.18 Why does O 3 act as a powerful oxidising agent?
7.19 How is O 3 estimated quantitatively?
7.14 Sulphur —
Allotropic
Forms
Sulphur forms numerous allotropes of which the yellow rhombic
(α-sulphur) and monoclinic (β -sulphur) forms are the most important.
The stable form at room temperature is rhombic sulphur, which
transforms to monoclinic sulphur when heated above 369 K.
Rhombic sulphur (α
α -sulphur)
This allotrope is yellow in colour, m.p. 385.8 K and specific gravity
2.06. Rhombic sulphur crystals are formed on evaporating the solution
of roll sulphur in CS 2 . It is insoluble in water but dissolves to some
extent in benzene, alcohol and ether. It is readily soluble in CS 2 .
Monoclinic sulphur (β
β -sulphur)
Its m.p. is 393 K and specific gravity 1.98. It is soluble in CS 2 . This
form of sulphur is prepared by melting rhombic sulphur in a dish
and cooling, till crust is formed. Two holes are made in the crust and
the remaining liquid poured out. On removing the crust, colourless
needle shaped crystals of β-sulphur are formed. It is stable above 369 K
and transforms into α-sulphur below it. Conversely, α-sulphur is
stable below 369 K and transforms into β-sulphur above this. At 369 K
both the forms are stable. This temperature is called transition
temperature.
Both rhombic and monoclinic sulphur have S 8 molecules. These S 8
molecules are packed to give different crystal structures. The S 8 ring
in both the forms is puckered and has a crown shape. The molecular
dimensions are given in Fig. 7.5(a).
Several other modifications
of sulphur containing 6-20
sulphur atoms per ring have
been synthesised in the last
two decades. In cyclo-S 6 , the
ring adopts the chair form and
the molecular dimensions are
as shown in Fig. 7.5 (b).
(a)
(b)
At elevated temperatures
(~1000 K), S 2 is the dominant
Fig. 7.5: The structures of (a) S 8 ring in
species and is paramagnetic
like O 2 .
rhombic sulphur and (b) S 6 form
Example 7.12
In vapour state sulphur partly exists as S 2 molecule which has two Solution
Which form of sulphur shows paramagnetic behaviour ?
unpaired electrons in the antibonding π * orbitals like O 2 and, hence,
exhibits paramagnetism.
187 The p-Block Elements7.15 Sulphur
Dioxide
Preparation
Sulphur dioxide is formed together with a little (6-8%) sulphur trioxide
when sulphur is burnt in air or oxygen:
S(s) + O 2 (g) → SO 2 (g)
In the laboratory it is readily generated by treating a sulphite with
dilute sulphuric acid.
2-
+
SO 3 (aq) + 2H (aq) → H 2 O(l) + SO 2 (g)
Industrially, it is produced as a by-product of the roasting of
sulphide ores.
4FeS 2 ( s ) + 11O 2 ( g ) → 2Fe 2 O 3 ( s ) + 8SO 2 ( g )
The gas after drying is liquefied under pressure and stored in steel cylinders.
Properties
Sulphur dioxide is a colourless gas with pungent smell and is highly
soluble in water. It liquefies at room temperature under a pressure of
two atmospheres and boils at 263 K.
Sulphur dioxide, when passed through water, forms a solution of
sulphurous acid.
SO 2 ( g ) + H 2 O ( l ) ⇌ H 2 SO 3 ( aq )
It reacts readily with sodium hydroxide solution, forming sodium
sulphite, which then reacts with more sulphur dioxide to form sodium
hydrogen sulphite.
2NaOH + SO 2 → Na 2 SO 3 + H 2 O
Na 2 SO 3 + H 2 O + SO 2 → 2NaHSO 3
In its reaction with water and alkalies, the behaviour of sulphur
dioxide is very similar to that of carbon dioxide.
Sulphur dioxide reacts with chlorine in the presence of charcoal (which
acts as a catalyst) to give sulphuryl chloride, SO 2 Cl 2 . It is oxidised to
sulphur trioxide by oxygen in the presence of vanadium(V) oxide catalyst.
SO 2 (g) + Cl 2 (g) → SO 2 Cl 2 (l)
V 2 O 5
2SO 2 ( g ) + O 2 ( g ) 

→ 2SO 3 ( g )
When moist, sulphur dioxide behaves as a reducing agent. For
example, it converts iron(III) ions to iron(II) ions and decolourises
acidified potassium permanganate(VII) solution; the latter reaction is a
convenient test for the gas.
2Fe 3 + + SO 2 + 2H 2 O → 2Fe 2 + + SO 2 4 − + 4H +
5SO 2 + 2MnO − 4 + 2H 2 O → 5SO 2 4 − + 4H + + 2Mn 2 +
The molecule of SO 2 is angular. It is a resonance hybrid
of the two canonical forms:
Uses
Uses: Sulphur dioxide is used (i) in refining petroleum and sugar (ii) in bleaching
wool and silk and (iii) as an anti-chlor, disinfectant and preservative. Sulphuric
acid, sodium hydrogen sulphite and calcium hydrogen sulphite (industrial
chemicals) are manufactured from sulphur dioxide. Liquid SO 2 is used as a
solvent to dissolve a number of organic and inorganic chemicals.
Chemistry 188Intext Questions
7.20 What happens when sulphur dioxide is passed through an aqueous
solution of Fe(III) salt?
7.21 Comment on the nature of two S–O bonds formed in SO 2 molecule. Are
the two S–O bonds in this molecule equal ?
7.22 How is the presence of SO 2 detected ?
7.16 Oxoacids of
Sulphur
Sulphur forms a number of oxoacids such as H 2 SO 3 , H 2 S 2 O 3 , H 2 S 2 O 4 ,
H 2 S 2 O 5 , H 2 S x O 6 (x = 2 to 5), H 2 SO 4 , H 2 S 2 O 7 , H 2 SO 5 , H 2 S 2 O 8 . Some of
these acids are unstable and cannot be isolated. They are known in
aqueous solution or in the form of their salts. Structures of some
important oxoacids are shown in Fig. 7.6.
Fig. 7.6: Structures of some important oxoacids of sulphur
7.17 Sulphuric
Acid
Manufacture
Sulphuric acid is one of the most important industrial chemicals
worldwide.
Sulphuric acid is manufactured by the Contact Process which involves
three steps:
(i) burning of sulphur or sulphide ores in air to generate SO 2 .
(ii) conversion of SO 2 to SO 3 by the reaction with oxygen in the presence
of a catalyst (V 2 O 5 ), and
(iii) absorption of SO 3 in H 2 SO 4 to give Oleum (H 2 S 2 O 7 ).
A flow diagram for the manufacture of sulphuric acid is shown in
(Fig. 7.7). The SO 2 produced is purified by removing dust and other
impurities such as arsenic compounds.
The key step in the manufacture of H 2 SO 4 is the catalytic oxidation
of SO 2 with O 2 to give SO 3 in the presence of V 2 O 5 (catalyst).
V 2 O 5
2SO 2 ( g ) + O 2 ( g ) 

→ 2SO 3 ( g ) ∆ r H 0 = − 196.6 kJmol − 1
The reaction is exothermic, reversible and the forward reaction leads
to a decrease in volume. Therefore, low temperature and high pressure
are the favourable conditions for maximum yield. But the temperature
should not be very low otherwise rate of reaction will become slow.
In practice, the plant is operated at a pressure of 2 bar and a
temperature of 720 K. The SO 3 gas from the catalytic converter is
189 The p-Block ElementsConc. H 2 SO 4
spray
Water
Impure spray
SO 2 +O 2
Conc. H 2 SO 4
SO 3
Dry SO 2 +O 2
V 2 O 5
Quartz
Sulphur
Preheater
Air
Sulphur
burner
Dust
precipitator
Waste
water
Washing and
cooling tower
Waste
acid
Drying
tower
Catalytic
converter
Arsenic purifier
containing
gelatinous hydrated
ferric oxide
Oleum
(H 2 S 2 O 7 )
Fig. 7.7: Flow diagram for the manufacture of sulphuric acid
absorbed in concentrated H 2 SO 4 to produce oleum. Dilution of oleum
with water gives H 2 SO 4 of the desired concentration. In the industry
two steps are carried out simultaneously to make the process a
continuous one and also to reduce the cost.
SO 3 + H 2 SO 4 → H 2 S 2 O 7
(Oleum)
The sulphuric acid obtained by Contact process is 96-98% pure.
Properties
Sulphuric acid is a colourless, dense, oily liquid with a specific gravity
of 1.84 at 298 K. The acid freezes at 283 K and boils at 611 K. It
dissolves in water with the evolution of a large quantity of heat. Hence,
care must be taken while preparing sulphuric acid solution from
concentrated sulphuric acid. The concentrated acid must be added
slowly into water with constant stirring.
The chemical reactions of sulphuric acid are as a result of the
following characteristics: (a) low volatility (b) strong acidic character
(c) strong affinity for water and (d) ability to act as an oxidising agent.
In aqueous solution, sulphuric acid ionises in two steps.
+
–
H 2 SO 4 (aq) + H 2 O(l) → H 3 O (aq) + HSO 4 (aq); K a 1 = very large ( K a 1 >10)
–
+
2-
HSO 4 (aq) + H 2 O(l) → H 3 O (aq) + SO 4 (aq) ; K a 2 = 1.2 × 10
–2
The larger value of K a 1 ( K a 1 >10) means that H 2 SO 4 is largely
+
–
dissociated into H and HSO 4 . Greater the value of dissociation constant
(K a ), the stronger is the acid.
The acid forms two series of salts: normal sulphates (such as sodium
sulphate and copper sulphate) and acid sulphates (e.g., sodium
hydrogen sulphate).
Sulphuric acid, because of its low volatility can be used to
manufacture more volatile acids from their corresponding salts.
Chemistry 1902 MX + H 2 SO 4 → 2 HX + M 2 SO 4 (X = F, Cl, NO 3 )
(M = Metal)
Concentrated sulphuric acid is a strong dehydrating agent. Many
wet gases can be dried by passing them through sulphuric acid,
provided the gases do not react with the acid. Sulphuric acid removes
water from organic compounds; it is evident by its charring action on
carbohydrates.
H 2 SO 4
C 12 H 22 O 11 
→ 12C + 11H 2 O
Hot concentrated sulphuric acid is a moderately strong oxidising
agent. In this respect, it is intermediate between phosphoric and nitric
acids. Both metals and non-metals are oxidised by concentrated
sulphuric acid, which is reduced to SO 2 .
Cu + 2 H 2 SO 4 (conc.) → CuSO 4 + SO 2 + 2H 2 O
S + 2H 2 SO 4 (conc.) → 3SO 2 + 2H 2 O
C + 2H 2 SO 4 (conc.) → CO 2 + 2 SO 2 + 2 H 2 O
Uses
Uses: Sulphuric acid is a very important industrial chemical. A nation’s
industrial strength can be judged by the quantity of sulphuric acid it
produces and consumes. It is needed for the manufacture of hundreds
of other compounds and also in many industrial processes. The bulk
of sulphuric acid produced is used in the manufacture of fertilisers
(e.g., ammonium sulphate, superphosphate). Other uses are in:
(a) petroleum refining (b) manufacture of pigments, paints and dyestuff
intermediates (c) detergent industry (d) metallurgical applications (e.g.,
cleansing metals before enameling, electroplating and galvanising
(e) storage batteries (f) in the manufacture of nitrocellulose products
and (g) as a laboratory reagent.
What happens when
Example 7.13
(i) Concentrated H 2 SO 4 is added to calcium fluoride
(ii) SO 3 is passed through water?
(i) It forms hydrogen fluoride
Solution
CaF 2 + H 2 SO 4 → CaSO 4 + 2HF
(ii) It dissolves SO 3 to give H 2 SO 4 .
SO 3 + H 2 O → H 2 SO 4
Intext Questions
7.23 Mention three areas in which H 2 SO 4 plays an important role.
7.24 Write the conditions to maximise the yield of H 2 SO 4 by Contact process.
7.25 Why is K a 2 ≪ K a 1 for H 2 SO 4 in water ?
191 The p-Block Elements7.18 Group 17
Elements Fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine and astatine are members of
Group 17. These are collectively known as the halogens (Greek
halo means salt and genes means born i.e., salt producers). The
halogens are highly reactive non-metallic elements. Like Groups 1
and 2, the elements of Group 17 show great similarity amongst
themselves. That much similarity is not found in the elements
of other groups of the periodic table. Also, there is a regular
gradation in their physical and chemical properties. Astatine is a
radioactive element.
7.18.1 Occurrence Fluorine and chlorine are fairly abundant while bromine and iodine
less so. Fluorine is present mainly as insoluble fluorides (fluorspar
CaF 2 , cryolite Na 3 AlF 6 and fluoroapatite 3Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 .CaF 2 ) and small
quantities are present in soil, river water plants and bones and teeth
of animals. Sea water contains chlorides, bromides and iodides of
sodium, potassium, magnesium and calcium, but is mainly sodium
chloride solution (2.5% by mass). The deposits of dried up seas
contain these compounds, e.g., sodium chloride and carnallite,
KCl.MgCl 2 .6H 2 O. Certain forms of marine life contain iodine in their
systems; various seaweeds, for example, contain upto 0.5% of iodine
and Chile saltpetre contains upto 0.2% of sodium iodate.
The important atomic and physical properties of Group 17
elements along with their electronic configurations are given in
Table 7.8.
Table 7.8: Atomic and Physical Properties of Halogens
Property
Atomic number
Atomic mass/g mol
–1
a
F Cl Br I At
9 17 35 53 85
19.00 35.45 79.90 126.90 210
Electronic configuration [He]2s 2 2p 5 [Ne]3s 2 3p 5 [Ar]3d 10 4s 2 4p 5 [Kr]4d 10 5s 2 5p 5 [Xe]4f 14 5d 10 6s 2 6p 5
Covalent radius/pm 64 99 114 133 –
Ionic radius X – /pm 133 184 196 220 –
1680 1256 1142 1008 –
–333 –349 –325 –296 –
4 3.2 3.0 2.7 2.2
515 381 347 305 –
F 2 Cl 2 Br 2 I 2 –
54.4 172.0 265.8 386.6 –
Boiling point/K 84.9 239.0 332.5 458.2 –
Density/g cm –3 1.5 (85) c 1.66 (203) c 3.19(273) c 4.94(293) d –
Distance X – X/pm 143 199 228 266 –
Bond dissociation enthalpy 158.8 242.6 192.8 151.1 –
2.87 1.36 1.09 0.54 –
Ionisation enthalpy/kJ mol
–1
Electron gain enthalpy/kJ mol –1
Electronegativity
b
∆ Hyd H(X )/kJ mol
–
–1
Melting point/K
–1
/(kJ mol )
E V /V e
a
b
c
Radioactive;
Pauling scale;
For the liquid at temperatures (K) given in the parentheses;
–
–
half-cell reaction is X 2 (g) + 2e → 2X (aq).
Chemistry 192
d
solid;
e
TheThe trends of some of the atomic, physical and chemical properties
are discussed below.
7.18.2 Electronic
Configuration
All these elements have seven electrons in their outermost shell
2
5
(ns np ) which is one electron short of the next noble gas.
7.18.3 Atomic
and Ionic
Radii The halogens have the smallest atomic radii in their respective periods
due to maximum effective nuclear charge. The atomic radius of fluorine
like the other elements of second period is extremely small. Atomic and
ionic radii increase from fluorine to iodine due to increasing number
of quantum shells.
7.18.4 Ionisation
Enthalpy They have little tendency to lose electron. Thus they have very high
ionisation enthalpy. Due to increase in atomic size, ionisation enthalpy
decreases down the group.
7.18.5 Electron
Gain
Enthalpy Halogens have maximum negative electron gain enthalpy in the
corresponding periods. This is due to the fact that the atoms of these
elements have only one electron less than stable noble gas configurations.
Electron gain enthalpy of the elements of the group becomes less negative
down the group. However, the negative electron gain enthalpy of fluorine
is less than that of chlorine. It is due to small size of fluorine atom. As
a result, there are strong interelectronic repulsions in the relatively
small 2p orbitals of fluorine and thus, the incoming electron does not
experience much attraction.
7.18.6
Electronegativity They have very high electronegativity. The electronegativity decreases
down the group. Fluorine is the most electronegative element in the
periodic table.
Halogens have maximum negative electron gain enthalpy in the
respective periods of the periodic table. Why? Example 7.14
Halogens have the smallest size in their respective periods and therefore
high effective nuclear charge. As a consequence, they readily accept
one electron to acquire noble gas electronic configuration. Solution
7.18.7 Physical
Properties
Halogens display smooth variations in their physical properties. Fluorine
and chlorine are gases, bromine is a liquid and iodine is a solid. Their
melting and boiling points steadily increase with atomic number. All
halogens are coloured. This is due to absorption of radiations in visible
region which results in the excitation of outer electrons to higher energy
level. By absorbing different quanta of radiation, they display different
colours. For example, F 2 , has yellow, Cl 2 , greenish yellow, Br 2 , red and
I 2 , violet colour. Fluorine and chlorine react with water. Bromine and
iodine are only sparingly soluble in water but are soluble in various
organic solvents such as chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, carbon
disulphide and hydrocarbons to give coloured solutions.
One curious anomaly we notice from Table 7.8 is the smaller
enthalpy of dissociation of F 2 compared to that of Cl 2 whereas X-X
bond dissociation enthalpies from chlorine onwards show the expected
193 The p-Block Elementstrend: Cl – Cl > Br – Br > I – I. A reason for this anomaly is the relatively
large electron-electron repulsion among the lone pairs in F 2 molecule
where they are much closer to each other than in case of Cl 2 .
Example 7.15 Although electron gain enthalpy of fluorine is less negative as compared
to chlorine, fluorine is a stronger oxidising agent than chlorine. Why?
Solution It is due to
(i) low enthalpy of dissociation of F-F bond (Table 7.8).
–
(ii) high hydration enthalpy of F (Table 7.8).
7.18.8 Chemical
Properties
Halogen atom
in ground state
(other than fluorine)
Oxidation states and trends in chemical reactivity
All the halogens exhibit –1 oxidation state. However, chlorine, bromine
and iodine exhibit + 1, + 3, + 5 and + 7 oxidation states also as
explained below:
ns
np
nd
1 unpaired electron accounts
for –1 or +1 oxidation states
First excited state 3 unpaired electrons account
for +3 oxidation states
Second excited state 5 unpaired electrons account
for +5 oxidation state
Third excited state 7 unpaired electrons
account for +7 oxidation state
The higher oxidation states of chlorine, bromine and iodine are realised
mainly when the halogens are in combination with the small and highly
electronegative fluorine and oxygen atoms. e.g., in interhalogens, oxides
and oxoacids. The oxidation states of +4 and +6 occur in the oxides and
oxoacids of chlorine and bromine. The fluorine atom has no d orbitals
in its valence shell and therefore cannot expand its octet. Being the most
electronegative, it exhibits only –1 oxidation state.
All the halogens are highly reactive. They react with metals and
non-metals to form halides. The reactivity of the halogens decreases
down the group.
The ready acceptance of an electron is the reason for the strong
oxidising nature of halogens. F 2 is the strongest oxidising halogen and
it oxidises other halide ions in solution or even in the solid phase. In
general, a halogen oxidises halide ions of higher atomic number.
–
–
F 2 + 2X → 2F + X 2 (X = Cl, Br or I)
–
–
Cl 2 + 2X → 2Cl + X 2 (X = Br or I)
–
–
Br 2 + 2I → 2Br + I 2
The decreasing oxidising ability of the halogens in aqueous solution
down the group is evident from their standard electrode potentials
(Table 7.8) which are dependent on the parameters indicated below:
Chemistry 194∆ eg H V
∆ hyd H V
1 X g 
1/ 2 ∆ diss H V
→ X ( g ) 
→ X – ( g ) 

→ X – ( aq )
2 ( )
2
The relative oxidising power of halogens can further be illustrated
by their reactions with water. Fluorine oxidises water to oxygen whereas
chlorine and bromine react with water to form corresponding hydrohalic
and hypohalous acids. The reaction of iodine with water is non-
–
spontaneous. In fact, I can be oxidised by oxygen in acidic medium;
just the reverse of the reaction observed with fluorine.
2F 2 ( g ) + 2H 2 O ( l ) → 4H + ( aq ) + 4F − ( aq ) + O 2 ( g )
X 2 ( g ) + H 2 O ( l ) → HX ( aq ) + HOX ( aq )
( where X = Cl or Br )
4I − ( aq ) + 4H + ( aq ) + O 2 ( g ) → 2I 2 ( s ) + 2H 2 O ( l )
Anomalous behaviour of fluorine
Like other elements of p-block present in second period of the periodic
table, fluorine is anomalous in many properties. For example, ionisation
enthalpy, electronegativity, and electrode potentials are all higher for
fluorine than expected from the trends set by other halogens. Also, ionic
and covalent radii, m.p. and b.p., enthalpy of bond dissociation and electron
gain enthalpy are quite lower than expected. The anomalous behaviour of
fluorine is due to its small size, highest electronegativity, low F-F bond
dissociation enthalpy, and non availability of d orbitals in valence shell.
Most of the reactions of fluorine are exothermic (due to the small
and strong bond formed by it with other elements). It forms only one
oxoacid while other halogens form a number of oxoacids. Hydrogen
fluoride is a liquid (b.p. 293 K) due to strong hydrogen bonding. Other
hydrogen halides are gases.
(i) Reactivity towards hydrogen: They all react with hydrogen to give
hydrogen halides but affinity for hydrogen decreases from fluorine
to iodine. Hydrogen halides dissolve in water to form hydrohalic
acids. Some of the properties of hydrogen halides are given in
Table 7.9. The acidic strength of these acids varies in the order:
HF < HCl < HBr < HI. The stability of these halides decreases down
the group due to decrease in bond (H–X) dissociation enthalpy in
the order: H–F > H–Cl > H–Br > H–I.
Table 7.9: Properties of Hydrogen Halides
Property HF HCl HBr HI
Melting point/K 190 159 185 222
Boiling point/K 293 189 206 238
Bond length (H – X)/pm 91.7 127.4 141.4 160.9
∆ diss H V /kJ mol –1 574 432 363 295
pK a 3.2 –7.0 –9.5 –10.0
(ii) Reactivity towards oxygen: Halogens form many oxides with oxygen
but most of them are unstable. Fluorine forms two oxides OF 2 and
O 2 F 2 . However, only OF 2 is thermally stable at 298 K. These oxides
195 The p-Block Elementsare essentially oxygen fluorides because of the higher
electronegativity of fluorine than oxygen. Both are strong fluorinating
agents. O 2 F 2 oxidises plutonium to PuF 6 and the reaction is used
in removing plutonium as PuF 6 from spent nuclear fuel.
Chlorine, bromine and iodine form oxides in which the oxidation
states of these halogens range from +1 to +7. A combination of kinetic
and thermodynamic factors lead to the generally decreasing order of
stability of oxides formed by halogens, I > Cl > Br. The higher oxides
of halogens tend to be more stable than the lower ones.
Chlorine oxides, Cl 2 O, ClO 2 , Cl 2 O 6 and Cl 2 O 7 are highly reactive
oxidising agents and tend to explode. ClO 2 is used as a bleaching
agent for paper pulp and textiles and in water treatment.
The bromine oxides, Br 2 O, BrO 2 , BrO 3 are the least stable
halogen oxides (middle row anomally) and exist only at low
temperatures. They are very powerful oxidising agents.
The iodine oxides, I 2 O 4 , I 2 O 5 , I 2 O 7 are insoluble solids and
decompose on heating. I 2 O 5 is a very good oxidising agent and is
used in the estimation of carbon monoxide.
(iii) Reactivity towards metals: Halogens react with metals to form
metal halides. For example, bromine reacts with magnesium to give
magnesium bromide.
Mg ( s ) + Br 2 ( l ) → MgBr 2 ( s )
The ionic character of the halides decreases in the order MF >
MCl > MBr > MI where M is a monovalent metal. If a metal exhibits
more than one oxidation state, the halides in higher oxidation
state will be more covalent than the one in lower oxidation state.
For example, SnCl 4 , PbCl 4 , SbCl 5 and UF 6 are more covalent than
SnCl 2 , PbCl 2 , SbCl 3 and UF 4 respectively.
(iv) Reactivity of halogens towards other halogens: Halogens combine
amongst themselves to form a number of compounds known as
interhalogens of the types XX ′ , XX 3 ′ , XX 5 ′ and XX 7 ′ where X is a
′
larger size halogen and X is smaller size halogen.
Example 7.16 Fluorine exhibits only –1 oxidation state whereas other halogens
exhibit + 1, + 3, + 5 and + 7 oxidation states also. Explain.
Solution Fluorine is the most electronegative element and cannot exhibit any positive
oxidation state. Other halogens have d orbitals and therefore, can expand
their octets and show + 1, + 3, + 5 and + 7 oxidation states also.
Intext Questions
7.26 Considering the parameters such as bond dissociation enthalpy, electron
gain enthalpy and hydration enthalpy, compare the oxidising power of
F 2 and Cl 2 .
7.27 Give two examples to show the anomalous behaviour of fluorine.
7.28 Sea is the greatest source of some halogens. Comment.
Chemistry 1967.19 Chlorine
Chlorine was discovered in 1774 by Scheele by the action of HCl on
MnO 2 . In 1810 Davy established its elementary nature and suggested the
name chlorine on account of its colour (Greek, chloros = greenish yellow).
Preparation
It can be prepared by any one of the following methods:
(i) By heating manganese dioxide with concentrated hydrochloric acid.
MnO 2 + 4HCl → MnCl 2 + Cl 2 + 2H 2 O
However, a mixture of common salt and concentrated H 2 SO 4 is
used in place of HCl.
4NaCl + MnO 2 + 4H 2 SO 4 → MnCl 2 + 4NaHSO 4 + 2H 2 O + Cl 2
(ii) By the action of HCl on potassium permanganate.
2KMnO 4 + 16HCl → 2KCl + 2MnCl 2 + 8H 2 O + 5Cl 2
Manufacture of chlorine
(i) Deacon’s process: By oxidation of hydrogen chloride gas by
atmospheric oxygen in the presence of CuCl 2 (catalyst) at 723 K.
CuCl 2
4HCl + O 2 
→ 2Cl 2 + 2H 2 O
(ii) Electrolytic process: Chlorine is obtained by the electrolysis of
brine (concentrated NaCl solution). Chlorine is liberated at anode.
It is also obtained as a by–product in many chemical industries.
Properties
It is a greenish yellow gas with pungent and suffocating odour. It is
about 2-5 times heavier than air. It can be liquefied easily into greenish
yellow liquid which boils at 239 K. It is soluble in water.
Chlorine reacts with a number of metals and non-metals to form chlorides.
2Al + 3Cl 2 → 2AlCl 3 ;
P 4 + 6Cl 2 → 4PCl 3
2Na + Cl 2 → 2NaCl;
S 8 + 4Cl 2 → 4S 2 Cl 2
2Fe + 3Cl 2 → 2FeCl 3 ;
It has great affinity for hydrogen. It reacts with compounds
containing hydrogen to form HCl.
H 2 + Cl 2 → 2HCl
H 2 S + Cl 2 → 2HCl + S
C 10 H 16 + 8Cl 2 → 16HCl + 10C
With excess ammonia, chlorine gives nitrogen and ammonium chloride
whereas with excess chlorine, nitrogen trichloride (explosive) is formed.
8NH 3 + 3Cl 2 → 6NH 4 Cl + N 2 ;
NH 3 + 3Cl 2 → NCl 3 + 3HCl
(excess)
(excess)
With cold and dilute alkalies chlorine produces a mixture of chloride
and hypochlorite but with hot and concentrated alkalies it gives chloride
and chlorate.
2NaOH + Cl 2 → NaCl + NaOCl + H 2 O
(cold and dilute)
6 NaOH + 3Cl 2 → 5NaCl + NaClO 3 + 3H 2 O
(hot and conc.)
With dry slaked lime it gives bleaching powder.
2Ca(OH) 2 + 2Cl 2 → Ca(OCl) 2 + CaCl 2 + 2H 2 O
197 The p-Block ElementsThe composition of bleaching powder is Ca(OCl) 2 .CaCl 2 .Ca(OH) 2 .2H 2 O.
Chlorine reacts with hydrocarbons and gives substitution products
with saturated hydrocarbons and addition products with unsaturated
hydrocarbons. For example,
UV
CH 4 + Cl 2 
→ CH 3 Cl + HCl
Methane
Methyl chloride
Room temp.
→ C 2 H 4 Cl 2
C 2 H 4 + Cl 2 
Ethene
1,2-Dichloroethane
Chlorine water on standing loses its yellow colour due to the
formation of HCl and HOCl. Hypochlorous acid (HOCl) so formed, gives
nascent oxygen which is responsible for oxidising and bleaching
properties of chlorine.
(i) It oxidises ferrous to ferric and sulphite to sulphate. Chlorine
oxidises sulphur dioxide to sulphur trioxide and iodine to iodate.
In the presence of water they form sulphuric acid and iodic acid
respectively.
2FeSO 4 + H 2 SO 4 + Cl 2 → Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 + 2HCl
Na 2 SO 3 + Cl 2 + H 2 O → Na 2 SO 4 + 2HCl
SO 2 + 2H 2 O + Cl 2 → H 2 SO 4 + 2HCl
I 2 + 6H 2 O + 5Cl 2 → 2HIO 3 + 10HCl
(ii) It is a powerful bleaching agent; bleaching action is due to oxidation.
Cl 2 + H 2 O → 2HCl + O
Coloured substance + O → Colourless substance
Uses
Uses: It is used (i) for bleaching woodpulp (required for the manufacture of
paper and rayon), bleaching cotton and textiles, (ii) in the extraction of gold
and platinum (iii) in the manufacture of dyes, drugs and organic compounds
such as CCl 4 , CHCl 3 , DDT, refrigerants, etc. (iv) in sterilising drinking water
and (v) preparation of poisonous gases such as phosgene (COCl 2 ), tear gas
(CCl 3 NO 2 ), mustard gas (ClCH 2 CH 2 SCH 2 CH 2 Cl).
Example 7.17 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction of Cl 2 with hot
and concentrated NaOH. Is this reaction a disproportionation
reaction? Justify.
Solution 3Cl 2 + 6NaOH → 5NaCl + NaClO 3 + 3H 2 O
Yes, chlorine from zero oxidation state is changed to –1 and +5
oxidation states.
Intext Questions
7.29 Give the reason for bleaching action of Cl 2 .
7.30 Name two poisonous gases which can be prepared from chlorine gas.
7.20 Hydrogen
Chloride
Chemistry 198
It bleaches vegetable or organic matter in the presence of moisture.
Bleaching effect of chlorine is permanent.
Glauber prepared this acid in 1648 by heating common salt with
concentrated sulphuric acid. Davy in 1810 showed that it is a compound
of hydrogen and chlorine.Preparation
In laboratory, it is prepared by heating sodium chloride with
concentrated sulphuric acid.
420 K
→ NaHSO 4 + HCl
NaCl + H 2 SO 4 
823 K
→ Na 2 SO 4 + HCl
NaHSO 4 + NaCl 
HCl gas can be dried by passing through concentrated sulphuric acid.
Properties
It is a colourless and pungent smelling gas. It is easily liquefied to a
colourless liquid (b.p.189 K) and freezes to a white crystalline solid
(f.p. 159 K). It is extremely soluble in water and ionises as follows:
HCl ( g ) + H 2 O ( l ) → H 3 O + ( aq ) + Cl − ( aq )
K a = 10 7
Its aqueous solution is called hydrochloric acid. High value of
dissociation constant (K a ) indicates that it is a strong acid in water.
It reacts with NH 3 and gives white fumes of NH 4 Cl.
NH 3 + HCl → NH 4 Cl
When three parts of concentrated HCl and one part of concentrated
HNO 3 are mixed, aqua regia is formed which is used for dissolving
noble metals, e.g., gold, platinum.
Au + 4H + + NO 3 − + 4Cl − → AuCl 4 − + NO + 2H 2 O
3Pt + 16H + + 4NO 3 − + 18Cl − → 3PtCl 6 2 − + 4NO + 8H 2 O
Hydrochloric acid decomposes salts of weaker acids, e.g.,
carbonates, hydrogencarbonates, sulphites, etc.
Na 2 CO 3 + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H 2 O + CO 2
NaHCO 3 + HCl → NaCl + H 2 O + CO 2
Na 2 SO 3 + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H 2 O + SO 2
Uses
Uses: It is used (i) in the manufacture of chlorine, NH 4 Cl and glucose (from
corn starch), (ii) for extracting glue from bones and purifying bone black, (iii)
in medicine and as a laboratory reagent.
When HCl reacts with finely powdered iron, it forms ferrous chloride
and not ferric chloride. Why? Example 7.18
Its reaction with iron produces H 2 .
Fe + 2HCl → FeCl 2 + H 2
Liberation of hydrogen prevents the formation of ferric chloride. Solution
7.21 Oxoacids of
Halogens
Due to high electronegativity and small size, fluorine forms only one
oxoacid, HOF known as fluoric (I) acid or hypofluorous acid. The other
halogens form several oxoacids. Most of them cannot be isolated in
pure state. They are stable only in aqueous solutions or in the form of
their salts. The oxoacids of halogens are given in Table 7.10 and their
structures are given in Fig. 7.8.
199 The p-Block ElementsTable 7.10: Oxoacids of Halogens
Halic (I) acid
HOF
HOCl
HOBr
HOI
(Hypohalous acid) (Hypofluorous acid) (Hypochlorous acid) (Hypobromous acid) (Hypoiodous acid)
Halic (III) acid
(Halous acid)
–
–
HOCIO
(chlorous acid)
–
–
–
–
Halic (V) acid – HOCIO 2 HOBrO 2 HOIO 2
(Halic acid) – (chloric acid) (bromic acid) (iodic acid)
Halic (VII) acid – HOCIO 3 HOBrO 3 HOIO 3
(Perhalic acid) – (perchloric acid) (perbromic acid) (periodic acid)
Fig. 7.8
The structures of
oxoacids of chlorine
7.22 Interhalogen
Compounds
When two different halogens react with each other, interhalogen
compounds are formed. They can be assigned general compositions as
′
′
′
′
′
XX , XX 3 , XX 5 and XX 7 where X is halogen of larger size and X of
′
smaller size and X is more electropositive than X . As the ratio between
′
radii of X and X increases, the number of atoms per molecule also
increases. Thus, iodine (VII) fluoride should have maximum number of
atoms as the ratio of radii between I and F should be maximum. That
is why its formula is IF 7 (having maximum number of atoms).
Preparation
The interhalogen compounds can be prepared by the direct
combination or by the action of halogen on lower interhalogen
compounds. The product formed depends upon some specific
conditions, For e.g.,
437 K
Cl 2 + F 2 
→ 2ClF ;
(equal volume)
573 K
Cl 2 + 3F 2 
→ 2ClF 3 ;
(excess)
I 2 + Cl 2 → 2ICl;
(equimolar )
Chemistry 200
I 2 + 3Cl 2 → 2ICl 3
(excess)
Br 2 + 3F 2 → 2BrF 3
(diluted with water)
Br 2 + 5F 2 → 2BrF 5
(excess)Properties
Some properties of interhalogen compounds are given in Table 7.11.
Table 7.11: Some Properties of Interhalogen Compounds
Type Formula Physical state and colour Structure
XX′ 1 ClF
BrF
a
IF
b
BrCl
ICl –
–
–
IBr colourless gas
pale brown gas
detected spectroscopically
gas
ruby red solid (α-form)
brown red solid (β-form)
black solid XX′ 3 ClF 3
BrF 3
IF 3
ICl 3c colourless gas
yellow green liquid
yellow powder
orange solid Bent
Bent
Bent
Bent
XX′ 5 IF 5 BrF 5 colourless gas but
solid below 77 K
colourless liquid ClF 5 colourless liquid Square
pyramidal
Square
pyramidal
Square
pyramidal
IF 7 colourless gas
XX′ 7
–
–
–
T -shaped
T -shaped
T -shaped (?)
T -shaped (?)
Pentagonal
bipyramidal
a
Very unstable; b The pure solid is known at room temperature; c Dimerises as Cl–bridged
dimer (I 2 Cl 6 )
These are all covalent molecules and are diamagnetic in nature.
They are volatile solids or liquids at 298 K except ClF which is a
gas. Their physical properties are intermediate between those of
constituent halogens except that their m.p. and b.p. are a little higher
than expected.
Their chemical reactions can be compared with the individual
halogens. In general, interhalogen compounds are more reactive
than halogens (except fluorine). This is because X–X′ bond in
interhalogens is weaker than X–X bond in halogens except F–F
bond. All these undergo hydrolysis giving halide ion derived from
the smaller halogen and a hypohalite ( when XX′), halite ( when
XX′ 3 ), halate (when XX′ 5 ) and perhalate (when XX′ 7 ) anion derived
from the larger halogen.
XX ' + H O → HX ' + HOX
2
Their molecular structures are very interesting which can be
explained on the basis of VSEPR theory (Example 7.19). The XX 3
compounds have the bent ‘T’ shape, XX 5 compounds square pyramidal
and IF 7 has pentagonal bipyramidal structures (Table 7.11).
201 The p-Block ElementsExample 7.19 Discuss the molecular shape of BrF 3 on the basis of VSEPR theory.
Solution The central atom Br has seven electrons
in the valence shell. Three of these will form electron-
pair bonds with three fluorine atoms leaving behind
four electrons. Thus, there are three bond pairs and
two lone pairs. According to VSEPR theory, these
will occupy the corners of a trigonal bipyramid. The
two lone pairs will occupy the equatorial positions
to minimise lone pair-lone pair and the bond pair-
lone pair repulsions which are greater than the bond
pair-bond pair repulsions. In addition, the axial
fluorine atoms will be bent towards the equatorial
fluorine in order to minimise the lone-pair-lone pair
repulsions. The shape would be that of a slightly
bent ‘T’.
Uses
Uses: These compounds can be used as non aqueous solvents. Interhalogen
compounds are very useful fluorinating agents. ClF 3 and BrF 3 are used for the
235
production of UF 6 in the enrichment of
U.
U(s) + 3ClF 3 (l) → UF 6 (g) + 3ClF(g)
Intext Question
7.31
7.23 Group 18
Elements
7.23.1 Occurrence
Why is ICl more reactive than I 2 ?
Group 18 consists of six elements: helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon
and radon. All these are gases and chemically unreactive. They form
very few compounds. Because of this they are termed noble gases.
All the noble gases except radon occur in the atmosphere. Their
atmospheric abundance in dry air is ~ 1% by volume of which argon
is the major constituent. Helium and sometimes neon are found in
minerals of radioactive origin e.g., pitchblende, monazite, cleveite. The
main commercial source of helium is natural gas. Xenon and radon
are the rarest elements of the group. Radon is obtained as a decay
226
product of
Ra.
226
88
Ra →
222
86
Rn + 2 4 He
Example 7.20 Why are the elements of Group 18 known as noble gases ?
Solution The elements present in Group 18 have their valence shell orbitals
completely filled and, therefore, react with a few elements only under
certain conditions. Therefore, they are now known as noble gases.
Chemistry 202The important atomic and physical properties of the Group 18
elements along with their electronic configurations are given in
Table 7.12. The trends in some of the atomic, physical and chemical
properties of the group are discussed here.
Table 7.12:
Propery
Atomic and Physical Properties of Group 18 Elements
He
Atomic number
–1
Atomic mass/ g mol
Ne
Ar
Kr
Rn *
Xe
2 10 18 36 54 86
4.00 20.18 39.95 83.80 131.30 222.00
Electronic configuration 1s 2
[He]2s 2 2p 6 [Ne] 3s 2 3p 6
[Ar]3d 10 4s 2 4p 6 [Kr]4d 10 5s 2 5p 6 [Xe]4f 14 5d 10 6s 2 6p 6
Atomic radius/pm 120 160 190 200 220 –
Ionisation enthalpy
/kJmol -1 2372 2080 1520 1351 1170 1037
Electron gain enthalpy
-1
/kJmol 48 116 96 96 77 68
Density (at STP)/gcm –3 1.8×10 –4 9.0×10 –4 1.8×10 –3 3.7×10 –3 5.9×10 –3 9.7×10 –3
Melting point/K – 24.6 83.8 115.9 161.3 202
Boiling point/K 4.2 27.1 87.2 119.7 165.0
Atmospheric content
(% by volume)
5.24×10
–4
–
1.82×10
–3
0.934
1.14×10
211
–4
8.7×10
–6
* radioactive
2
6
7.23.2 Electronic
Configuration All noble gases have general electronic configuration ns np except
2
helium which has 1s (Table 7.12). Many of the properties of noble
gases including their inactive nature are ascribed to their closed
shell structures.
7.23.3 Ionisation
Enthalpy Due to stable electronic configuration these gases exhibit very high
ionisation enthalpy. However, it decreases down the group with increase
in atomic size.
7.23.4 Atomic
Radii Atomic radii increase down the group with increase in atomic
number.
7.23.5 Electron
Gain
Enthalpy Since noble gases have stable electronic configurations, they have no
tendency to accept the electron and therefore, have large positive values
of electron gain enthalpy.
Physical Properties
All the noble gases are monoatomic. They are colourless, odourless
and tasteless. They are sparingly soluble in water. They have very low
melting and boiling points because the only type of interatomic
interaction in these elements is weak dispersion forces. Helium has the
lowest boiling point (4.2 K) of any known substance. It has an unusual
property of diffusing through most commonly used laboratory materials
such as rubber, glass or plastics.
Example 7.21
Noble gases being monoatomic have no interatomic forces except weak Solution
Noble gases have very low boiling points. Why?
dispersion forces and therefore, they are liquefied at very low
temperatures. Hence, they have low boiling points.
203 The p-Block ElementsChemical Properties
In general, noble gases are least reactive. Their inertness to chemical
reactivity is attributed to the following reasons:
2
2
6
(i) The noble gases except helium (1s ) have completely filled ns np
electronic configuration in their valence shell.
(ii) They have high ionisation enthalpy and more positive electron
gain enthalpy.
The reactivity of noble gases has been investigated occasionally,
ever since their discovery, but all attempts to force them to react to
form the compounds, were unsuccessful for quite a few years. In March
1962, Neil Bartlett, then at the University of British Columbia, observed
the reaction of a noble gas. First, he prepared a red compound which
+
–
is formulated as O 2 PtF 6 . He, then realised that the first ionisation
–1
enthalpy of molecular oxygen (1175 kJmol ) was almost identical with
–1
that of xenon (1170 kJ mol ). He made efforts to prepare same type of
compound with Xe and was successful in preparing another red colour
+
–
compound Xe PtF 6 by mixing PtF 6 and xenon. After this discovery, a
number of xenon compounds mainly with most electronegative elements
like fluorine and oxygen, have been synthesised.
The compounds of krypton are fewer. Only the difluoride (KrF 2 ) has
been studied in detail. Compounds of radon have not been isolated
but only identified (e.g., RnF 2 ) by radiotracer technique. No true
compounds of Ar, Ne or He are yet known.
(a) Xenon-fluorine compounds
Xenon forms three binary fluorides, XeF 2 , XeF 4 and XeF 6 by the
direct reaction of elements under appropriate experimental conditions.
673 K, 1 bar
XeF 2 (s)
Xe (g) + F 2 (g) →
(xenon in excess)
873 K, 7 bar
Xe (g) + 2F 2 (g) 
→ XeF 4 (s)
(1:5 ratio)
573 K, 60 − 70bar
Xe (g) + 3F 2 (g) 
→ XeF 6 (s)
(1:20 ratio)
XeF 6 can also be prepared by the interaction of XeF 4 and O 2 F 2 at 143K.
XeF 4 + O 2 F 2 → XeF 6 + O 2
XeF 2 , XeF 4 and XeF 6 are colourless crystalline solids and sublime
readily at 298 K. They are powerful fluorinating agents. They are readily
hydrolysed even by traces of water. For example, XeF 2 is hydrolysed to
give Xe, HF and O 2 .
2XeF 2 (s) + 2H 2 O(l) → 2Xe (g) + 4 HF(aq) + O 2 (g)
The structures of the three xenon fluorides can be deduced from
VSEPR and these are shown in Fig. 7.9. XeF 2 and XeF 4 have linear and
square planar structures respectively. XeF 6 has seven electron pairs (6
bonding pairs and one lone pair) and would, thus, have a distorted
octahedral structure as found experimentally in the gas phase.
Xenon fluorides react with fluoride ion acceptors to form cationic
species and fluoride ion donors to form fluoroanions.
+
–
+
–
XeF 2 + PF 5 → [XeF] [PF 6 ] ; XeF 4 + SbF 5 → [XeF 3 ] [SbF 6 ]
XeF 6 + MF → M + [XeF 7 ] – (M = Na, K, Rb or Cs)
Chemistry 204(b) Xenon-oxygen compounds
Hydrolysis of XeF 4 and XeF 6 with water gives Xe0 3 .
6XeF 4 + 12 H 2 O → 4Xe + 2Xe0 3 + 24 HF + 3 O 2
XeF 6 + 3 H 2 O → XeO 3 + 6 HF
F
F
F
Partial hydrolysis of XeF 6 gives
oxyfluorides, XeOF 4 and XeO 2 F 2 .
XeF 6 + H 2 O → XeOF 4 + 2 HF
XeF 6 + 2 H 2 O → XeO 2 F 2 + 4HF
Xe
Xe
F
F
F
(a) Linear
XeO 3 is a colourless explosive solid and
has a pyramidal molecular structure (Fig.
7.9). XeOF 4 is a colourless volatile liquid
and has a square pyramidal molecular
structure (Fig.7.9).
(b) Square planar
F
F
O
F
F
F
Xe
Fig. 7.9
The structures of
(a) XeF 2 (b) XeF 4
(c) XeF 6 (d) XeOF 4
and (e) XeO 3
F
Xe
Xe
F
(c) Distorted octahedral
O
O
F
F
F
O
(d) Square pyramidal
(e) Pyramidal
Example 7.22
No, the products of hydrolysis are XeOF 4 and XeO 2 F 2 where the oxidation Solution
Does the hydrolysis of XeF 6 lead to a redox reaction?
states of all the elements remain the same as it was in the reacting state.
Uses
Uses: Helium is a non-inflammable and light gas. Hence, it is used in filling
balloons for meteorological observations. It is also used in gas-cooled nuclear
reactors. Liquid helium (b.p. 4.2 K) finds use as cryogenic agent for carrying out
various experiments at low temperatures. It is used to produce and sustain
powerful superconducting magnets which form an essential part of modern NMR
spectrometers and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) systems for clinical
diagnosis. It is used as a diluent for oxygen in modern diving apparatus because
of its very low solubility in blood.
Neon is used in discharge tubes and fluorescent bulbs for advertisement display
purposes. Neon bulbs are used in botanical gardens and in green houses.
Argon is used mainly to provide an inert atmosphere in high temperature
metallurgical processes (arc welding of metals or alloys) and for filling electric bulbs.
It is also used in the laboratory for handling substances that are air-sensitive.
There are no significant uses of Xenon and Krypton. They are used in light
bulbs designed for special purposes.
Intext Questions
7.32 Why is helium used in diving apparatus?
7.33 Balance the following equation: XeF 6 + H 2 O → XeO 2 F 2 + HF
7.34 Why has it been difficult to study the chemistry of radon?
205 The p-Block ElementsSummary
Groups 13 to 18 of the periodic table consist of p-block elements with their valence
shell electronic configuration ns 2 np 1–6 . Groups 13 and 14 were dealt with in Class
XI. In this Unit remaining groups of the p-block have been discussed.
Group 15 consists of five elements namely, N, P, As, Sb and Bi which have
general electronic configuration ns 2 np 3 . Nitrogen differs from other elements of this
group due to small size, formation of p π –p π multiple bonds with itself and with
highly electronegative atom like O or C and non-availability of d orbitals to expand
its valence shell. Elements of group 15 show gradation in properties. They react with
oxygen, hydrogen and halogens. They exhibit two important oxidation states, + 3
and + 5 but +3 oxidation is favoured by heavier elements due to ‘inert pair effect’.
Dinitrogen can be prepared in laboratory as well as on industrial scale. It forms
oxides in various oxidation states as N 2 O, NO, N 2 O 3 , NO 2 , N 2 O 4 and N 2 O 5 . These
oxides have resonating structures and have multiple bonds. Ammonia can be
prepared on large scale by Haber’s process. HNO 3 is an important industrial
chemical. It is a strong monobasic acid and is a powerful oxidising agent. Metals
and non-metals react with HNO 3 under different conditions to give NO or NO 2 .
Phosphorus exists as P 4 in elemental form. It exists in several allotropic forms.
It forms hydride, PH 3 which is a highly poisonous gas. It forms two types of halides as
PX 3 and PX 5 . PCl 3 is prepared by the reaction of white phosphorus with dry chlorine
while PCl 5 is prepared by the reaction of phosphorus with SO 2 Cl 2 . Phosphorus forms
a number of oxoacids. Depending upon the number of P–OH groups, their basicity
varies. The oxoacids which have P–H bonds are good reducing agents.
The Group 16 elements have general electronic configuration ns 2 np 4 . They show
maximum oxidation state, +6. Gradation in physical and chemical properties is
observed in the group 16 elements. In laboratory, dioxygen is prepared by heating
KClO 3 in presence of MnO 2 . It forms a number of oxides with metals. Allotropic form
of oxygen is O 3 which is a highly oxidising agent. Sulphur forms a number of allotropes.
Of these, α – and β – forms of sulphur are the most important. Sulphur combines with
oxygen to give oxides such as SO 2 and SO 3 . SO 2 is prepared by the direct union of
sulphur with oxygen. SO 2 is used in the manufacture of H 2 SO 4 . Sulphur forms a
number of oxoacids. Amongst them, the most important is H 2 SO 4 . It is prepared by
contact process. It is a dehydrating and oxidising agent. It is used in the manufacture
of several compounds.
Group 17 of the periodic table consists of the following elements F, Cl, Br, I and
At.These elements are extremely reactive and as such they are found in the
combined state only. The common oxidation state of these elements is –1. However,
highest oxidation state can be +7. They show regular gradation in physical and
chemical properties. They form oxides, hydrogen halides, interhalogen compounds
and oxoacids. Chlorine is conveniently obtained by the reaction of HCl with KMnO 4 .
HCl is prepared by heating NaCl with concentrated H 2 SO 4 . Halogens combine with
one another to form interhalogen compounds of the type XX 1n (n = 1, 3, 5, 7)
where X 1 is lighter than X. A number of oxoacids of halogens are known. In the
structures of these oxoacids, halogen is the central atom which is bonded in each
case with one OH bond as X–OH. In some cases X = 0 bonds are also found.
Group 18 of the periodic table consists of noble gases. They have ns 2 np 6 valence
shell electronic configuration except He which has 1s 2 . All the gases except Rn
occur in atmosphere. Rn is obtained as the decay product of 226 Ra.
Due to complete octet of outermost shell, they have less tendency to form
compounds. The best characterised compounds are those of xenon with fluorine
and oxygen only under certain conditions. These gases have several uses. Argon is
used to provide inert atmosphere, helium is used in filling balloons for meteorological
observations, neon is used in discharge tubes and fluorescent bulbs.
Chemistry 206Exercises
7.1 Discuss the general characteristics of Group 15 elements with reference to
their electronic configuration, oxidation state, atomic size, ionisation enthalpy
and electronegativity.
7.2 Why does the reactivity of nitrogen differ from phosphorus?
7.3 Discuss the trends in chemical reactivity of group 15 elements.
7.4 Why does NH 3 form hydrogen bond but PH 3 does not?
7.5 How is nitrogen prepared in the laboratory? Write the chemical equations
of the reactions involved.
7.6 How is ammonia manufactured industrially?
7.7 Illustrate how copper metal can give different products on reaction with HNO 3 .
7.8 Give the resonating structures of NO 2 and N 2 O 5 .
7.9 The HNH angle value is higher than HPH, HAsH and HSbH angles. Why?
[Hint: Can be explained on the basis of sp 3 hybridisation in NH 3 and only
s–p bonding between hydrogen and other elements of the group].
7.10 Why does R 3 P = O exist but R 3 N = O does not (R = alkyl group)?
7.11 Explain why NH 3 is basic while BiH 3 is only feebly basic.
7.12 Nitrogen exists as diatomic molecule and phosphorus as P 4 . Why?
7.13 Write main differences between the properties of white phosphorus and red
phosphorus.
7.14 Why does nitrogen show catenation properties less than phosphorus?
7.15 Give the disproportionation reaction of H 3 PO 3 .
7.16 Can PCl 5 act as an oxidising as well as a reducing agent? Justify.
7.17 Justify the placement of O, S, Se, Te and Po in the same group of the
periodic table in terms of electronic configuration, oxidation state and hydride
formation.
7.18 Why is dioxygen a gas but sulphur a solid?
7.19 Knowing the electron gain enthalpy values for O → O and O → O as –141
–1
and 702 kJ mol respectively, how can you account for the formation of a
2–
–
large number of oxides having O species and not O ?
(Hint: Consider lattice energy factor in the formation of compounds).
7.20 Which aerosols deplete ozone?
7.21 Describe the manufacture of H 2 SO 4 by contact process?
7.22 How is SO 2 an air pollutant?
7.23 Why are halogens strong oxidising agents?
7.24 Explain why fluorine forms only one oxoacid, HOF.
7.25 Explain why inspite of nearly the same electronegativity, nitrogen forms
hydrogen bonding while chlorine does not.
7.26 Write two uses of ClO 2 .
7.27 Why are halogens coloured?
7.28 Write the reactions of F 2 and Cl 2 with water.
7.29 How can you prepare Cl 2 from HCl and HCl from Cl 2 ? Write reactions only.
7.30 What inspired N. Bartlett for carrying out reaction between Xe and PtF 6 ?
7.31 What are the oxidation states of phosphorus in the following:
(i) H 3 PO 3
(ii) PCl 3
(iii) Ca 3 P 2
(iv) Na 3 PO 4
(v) POF 3 ?
–
2–
207 The p-Block Elements7.32 Write balanced equations for the following:
(i) NaCl is heated with sulphuric acid in the presence of MnO 2 .
(ii) Chlorine gas is passed into a solution of NaI in water.
7.33 How are xenon fluorides XeF 2 , XeF 4 and XeF 6 obtained?
7.34 With what neutral molecule is ClO isoelectronic? Is that molecule a Lewis
base?
7.35 How are XeO 3 and XeOF 4 prepared?
7.36
7.37
–
Arrange the following in the order of property indicated for each set:
(i) F 2 , Cl 2 , Br 2 , I 2 - increasing bond dissociation enthalpy.
(ii) HF, HCl, HBr, HI - increasing acid strength.
(iii) NH 3 , PH 3 , AsH 3 , SbH 3 , BiH 3 – increasing base strength.
Which one of the following does not exist?
(i) XeOF 4
(ii) NeF 2
(iii) XeF 2
(iv) XeF 6
7.38 Give the formula and describe the structure of a noble gas species which
is isostructural with:
(i) ICl 4–
(ii) IBr 2–
(iii) BrO 3–
7.39 Why do noble gases have comparatively large atomic sizes?
7.40 List the uses of neon and argon gases.
Answers to Some Intext Questions
7.1 Higher the positive oxidation state of central atom, more will be its polarising
power which, in turn, increases the covalent character of bond formed
between the central atom and the other atom.
7.2 Because BiH 3 is the least stable among the hydrides of Group 15.
7.3 Because of strong pπ–pπ overlap resulting into the triple bond, N≡N.
7.6 From the structure of N 2 O 5 it is evident that covalence of nitrogen is four.
7.7 Both are sp 3 hybridised. In PH 4+ all the four orbitals are bonded whereas
in PH 3 there is a lone pair of electrons on P, which is responsible for lone
pair-bond pair repulsion in PH 3 reducing the bond angle to less than
109° 28′.
7.10 PCl 5 + D 2 O → POCl 3 + 2DCl
7.11 Three P–OH groups are present in the molecule of H 3 PO 4 . Therefore, its
basicity is three.
7.15 Because of small size and high electronegativity of oxygen, molecules of
water are highly associated through hydrogen bonding resulting in its
liquid state.
7.21 Both the S–O bonds are covalent and have equal strength due to resonating
structures.
7.25
H 2 SO 4 is a very strong acid in water largely because of its first ionisation
to H 3 O + and HSO 4– . The ionisation of HSO 4 – to H 3 O + and SO 42– is very very
small. That is why K a 2 << K a 1 .
7.31 In general, interhalogen compounds are more reactive than halogens due
to weaker X–X 1 bonding than X–X bond. Thus, ICl is more reactive than I 2 .
7.34 Radon is radioactive with very short half-life which makes the study of
chemistry of radon difficult.
Chemistry 208
Unit
8
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• learn the positions of the d– and
f-block elements in the periodic
table;
• know the electronic configurations
of the transition (d-block) and the
inner transition (f-block) elements;
• appreciate the relative stability of
various oxidation states in terms
of electrode potential values;
• describe
the
preparation,
properties, structures and uses
of some important compounds
such as K 2 Cr 2 O 7 and KMnO 4 ;
• understand
the
general
characteristics of the d– and
f–block elements and the general
horizontal and group trends in
them;
• describe the properties of the
f-block elements and give a
comparative account of the
lanthanoids and actinoids with
respect
to
their
electronic
configurations, oxidation states
and chemical behaviour.
The d-
d - and f-
f -
Block Element
Elements s
Iron, copper, silver and gold are among the transition elements that
have played important roles in the development of human civilisation.
The inner transition elements such as Th, Pa and U are proving
excellent sources of nuclear energy in modern times.
The d-block of the periodic table contains the elements
of the groups 3-12 in which the d orbitals are
progressively filled in each of the four long periods.
The elements constituting the f -block are those in
which the 4 f and 5 f orbitals are progressively filled
in the latter two long periods; these elements are formal
members of group 3 from which they have been taken
out to form a separate f-block of the periodic table.
The names transition metals and inner transition
metals are often used to refer to the elements of d-and
f-blocks respectively.
There are mainly three series of the transition
metals, 3d series (Sc to Zn), 4d series (Y to Cd) and 5d
series (La to Hg, omitting Ce to Lu). The fourth 6d
series which begins with Ac is still incomplete. The two
series of the inner transition metals, (4f and 5f) are
known as lanthanoids and actinoids respectively.
Strictly speaking, a transition element is defined as
the one which has incompletely filled d orbitals in its
ground state or in any one of its oxidation states. Zinc,
10
cadmium and mercury of group 12 have full d
configuration in their ground state as well as in their
common oxidation states and hence, are not regarded
as transition metals. However, being the end members
of the three transition series, their chemistry is studied
along with the chemistry of the transition metals.
The presence of partly filled d or f orbitals in their
atoms sets the study of the transition elements and
2017-18their compounds apart from that of the main group
elements. However, the usual theory of valence as
applicable to the main group elements can also be
applied successfully to the transition elements.
Various precious metals such as silver, gold and
platinum and industrially important metals like iron,
copper and titanium form part of the transition metals.
In this Unit, besides introduction, we shall first deal
with the electronic configuration, occurrence and general
characteristics of the transition elements with special
emphasis on the trends in the properties of the first
row (3d) transition metals and the preparation and
properties of some important compounds. This will be
followed by consideration of certain general aspects such
as electronic configurations, oxidation states and
chemical reactivity of the inner transition metals.
THE TRANSITION ELEMENTS (d-BLOCK)
8.1 Position in the
Periodic Table The d–block occupies the large middle section flanked by s– and
p– blocks in the periodic table. The very name ‘transition’ given to the
elements of d-block is only because of their position between s– and
p– block elements. The d–orbitals of the penultimate energy level in
their atoms receive electrons giving rise to the three rows of the transition
metals, i.e., 3d, 4d and 5d. The fourth row of 6d is still incomplete.
These series of the transition elements are shown in Table 8.1.
8.2 Electronic
Configurations
of the d-Block
Elements In general the electronic configuration of these elements is
1–10
1–2
(n-1)d ns . The (n–1) stands for the inner d orbitals which may have
one to ten electrons and the outermost ns orbital may have one or two
electrons. However, this generalisation has several exceptions because
of very little energy difference between (n-1)d and ns orbitals.
Furthermore, half and completely filled sets of orbitals are relatively
more stable. A consequence of this factor is reflected in the electronic
configurations of Cr and Cu in the 3d series. Consider the case of Cr,
5
1
4
2
for example, which has 3d 4s instead of 3d 4s ; the energy gap between
the two sets (3d and 4s) of orbitals is small enough to prevent electron
entering the 3d orbitals. Similarly in case of Cu, the configuration is
10
1
9
2
3d 4s and not 3d 4s . The outer electronic configurations of the
transition elements are given in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Outer Electronic Configurations of the Transition Elements (ground state)
1st Series
Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn
Z 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
4s 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 2
3d 1 2 3 5 5 6 7 8 10 10
Chemistry 210
2017-182nd Series
Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd
39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
5s 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 2
4d 1 2 4 5 6 7 8 10 10 10
Z
3rd Series
La Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg
Z 57 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80
6s 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 2
5d 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 10
4th Series
Ac Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Ds Rg Uub
Z 89 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112
7s 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2
6d 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 10
The electronic configurations of Zn, Cd and Hg are represented by
10
2
the general formula (n-1)d ns . The orbitals in these elements are
completely filled in the ground state as well as in their common
oxidation states. Therefore, they are not regarded as transition elements.
The d orbitals of the transition elements project to the periphery of
an atom more than the other orbitals (i.e., s and p), hence, they are more
influenced by the surroundings as well as affecting the atoms or molecules
surrounding them. In some respects, ions of a given d n configuration
(n = 1 – 9) have similar magnetic and electronic properties. With partly
filled d orbitals these elements exhibit certain characteristic properties
such as display of a variety of oxidation states, formation of coloured
ions and entering into complex formation with a variety of ligands.
The transition metals and their compounds also exhibit catalytic
property and paramagnetic behaviour. All these characteristics have
been discussed in detail later in this Unit.
There are greater horizontal similarities in the properties of the
transition elements in contrast to the main group elements. However,
some group similarities also exist. We shall first study the general
characteristics and their trends in the horizontal rows (particularly 3d
row) and then consider some group similarities.
On what ground can you say that scandium (Z = 21) is a transition
element but zinc (Z = 30) is not? Example 8.1
On the basis of incompletely filled 3d orbitals in case of scandium atom
1
in its ground state (3d ), it is regarded as a transition element. On the
other hand, zinc atom has completely filled d orbitals (3d 10 ) in its
ground state as well as in its oxidised state, hence it is not regarded
as a transition element. Solution
211 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18Intext Question
10
8.1 Silver atom has completely filled d orbitals (4d ) in its ground state.
How can you say that it is a transition element?
8 . 3 General
Properties of
the Transition
Elements
(d-Block)
8.3.1 Physical Properties
Nearly all the transition elements display typical metallic properties
such as high tensile strength, ductility, malleability, high thermal and
electrical conductivity and metallic lustre. With the exceptions of Zn,
Cd, Hg and Mn, they have one or more typical metallic structures at
normal temperatures.
Lattice Structures of Transition Metals
Sc
hcp
(bcc)
Y
hcp
(bcc)
La
hcp
(ccp,bcc)
Ti V
Cr
Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn
hcp
(bcc) bcc
X
(hcp) bcc
(hcp) ccp ccp ccp X
(hcp)
Zr Nb
Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd
hcp
(bcc) bcc bcc hcp hcp ccp ccp ccp X
(hcp)
Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg
hcp
(bcc) bcc bcc hcp hcp ccp ccp ccp X
bcc
(bcc, ccp)
(bcc = body centred cubic; hcp = hexagonal close packed;
ccp = cubic close packed; X = a typical metal structure).
4
W
Re
Ta
3
Os
Ru
Mo
Ir
Tc
Hf
Nb
2
Zr
Cr
Rh
V
Ti
Fe
Pt
Co Pd
Ni
Mn
1
Cu
Au
Ag
Atomic number
Fig. 8.1: Trends in melting points of
transition elements
The transition metals (with the exception
of Zn, Cd and Hg) are very much hard and
have low volatility. Their melting and boiling
points are high. Fig. 8.1 depicts the melting
points of the 3d, 4d and 5d transition metals.
The high melting points of these metals are
attributed to the involvement of greater
number of electrons from (n-1)d in addition to
the ns electrons in the interatomic metallic
bonding. In any row the melting points of these
5
metals rise to a maximum at d except for
anomalous values of Mn and Tc and fall
regularly as the atomic number increases.
They have high enthalpies of atomisation which
are shown in Fig. 8.2. The maxima at about
the middle of each series indicate that one
unpaired electron per d orbital is particularly
Chemistry 212
2017-18favourable for strong interatomic interaction. In general, greater the
number of valence electrons, stronger is the resultant bonding. Since
the enthalpy of atomisation is an important factor in determining the
standard electrode potential of a metal, metals with very high enthalpy
of atomisation (i.e., very high boiling point) tend to be noble in their
reactions (see later for electrode potentials).
Another generalisation that may be drawn from Fig. 8.2 is that the
metals of the second and third series have greater enthalpies of
atomisation than the corresponding elements of the first series; this is an
important factor in accounting for the occurrence of much more frequent
metal – metal bonding in compounds of the heavy transition metals.
Fig. 8.2
Trends in enthalpies
of atomisation of
transition elements
8.3.2 Variation in
Atomic and
Ionic Sizes
of
Transition
Metals
In general, ions of the same charge in a given series show progressive
decrease in radius with increasing atomic number. This is because the
new electron enters a d orbital each time the nuclear charge increases
by unity. It may be recalled that the shielding effect of a d electron is
not that effective, hence the net electrostatic attraction between the
nuclear charge and the outermost electron increases and the ionic
radius decreases. The same trend is observed in the atomic radii of a
given series. However, the variation within a series is quite small. An
interesting point emerges when atomic sizes of one series are compared
with those of the corresponding elements in the other series. The curves
in Fig. 8.3 show an increase from the first (3d) to the second (4d) series
of the elements but the radii of the third (5d) series are virtually the
same as those of the corresponding members of the second series. This
phenomenon is associated with the intervention of the 4f orbitals which
must be filled before the 5d series of elements begin. The filling of 4f
before 5d orbital results in a regular decrease in atomic radii called
Lanthanoid contraction which essentially compensates for the expected
213 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18increase in atomic size with increasing atomic number. The net result
of the lanthanoid contraction is that the second and the third d series
exhibit similar radii (e.g., Zr 160 pm, Hf 159 pm) and have very similar
physical and chemical properties much more than that expected on
the basis of usual family relationship.
19
The factor responsible for the lanthanoid
contraction is somewhat similar to that observed
18
in an ordinary transition series and is attributed
17
to similar cause, i.e., the imperfect shielding of
one electron by another in the same set of orbitals.
16
However, the shielding of one 4f electron by
15
another is less than that of one d electron by
14
another, and as the nuclear charge increases
along the series, there is fairly regular decrease
13
n
in the size of the entire 4f orbitals.
12
The decrease in metallic radius coupled with
Fe Co Ni Cu Zn
increase in atomic mass results in a general
Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd
increase in the density of these elements. Thus,
Os Ir Pt Au Hg
from titanium (Z = 22) to copper (Z = 29) the
atomic radii of
significant increase in the density may be noted
elements
(Table 8.2).
Sc Ti V Cr Mn
Y Zr Nb Mo Tc
La Hf Ta W
Re
Fig. 8.3: Trends in
transition
Table 8.2: Electronic Configurations and some other Properties of
the First Series of Transition Elements
Element
Atomic number
Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe
21 22 23 24 25 26
Co
27
Ni Cu
28 29
Zn
30
Electronic configuration
M
M +
M 2+
M 3+
3d 4s 1 2 3d 4s 2 2 3d 4s
3 2
1 1 2 1 3 1
3d 4s
3d
3d 4s
1
[Ar]
3d 2
3d 1
V
Enthalpy of atomisation, ∆ a H /kJ mol
326
V
∆ i H /kJ mol
Ionisation enthalpy/∆
V
3d 4s
3d 3
3d 2
5
3d 4s
1
3d 4s 5 2 3d 4s 6 2 3d 4s 7 2 3d 4s 8 2
5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1
3d 5 3d 4s
3d 4 3d
5
3d 3 3d
4
3d 4s
3d 6
3d 5
3d 4s
3d 7
3d 6
3d 4s
10
1
3d 4s
3d
10
9
10 2
10 1
3d 4s
3d 4s
3d 8 3d 3d 7 – –
339 126
3d
10
–1
473
515
397
281
416
425
430
–1
I 631 656 650 653 717 762 758 736 745 906
II 1235 1309 1414 1592 1509 1561 1644 1752 1958 1734
III 2393 2657 2833 2990 3260 2962 3243 3402 3556 3829
Metallic/ionic M 164 147 135 129 137 126 125 125 128 137
radii/pm M 2+ – – 79 82 82 77 74 70 73 75
M 3+ 73 67 64 62 65 65 61 60 – –
∆ i H
∆ i H
∆ i H
V
V
Standard
electrode
2+ – –1.63 –1.18 –0.90 –1.18 –0.44 –0.28 –0.25 +0.34 -0.76
3+ – –0.37 –0.26 –0.41 +1.57 +0.77 +1.97 – – –
3.43 4.1 6.07 7.8 8.7 8.9
M /M
V
potential E /V
–3
Density/g cm
M /M 2+
7.19
7.21
8.9
7.1
Chemistry 214
2017-18Why do the transition elements exhibit higher enthalpies of
atomisation? Example 8.2
Because of large number of unpaired electrons in their atoms they
have stronger interatomic interaction and hence stronger bonding
between atoms resulting in higher enthalpies of atomisation. Solution
Intext Question
8.2 In the series Sc (Z = 21) to Zn (Z = 30), the enthalpy of atomisation
–1
of zinc is the lowest, i.e., 126 kJ mol . Why?
8.3.3 Ionisation
Enthalpies
Due to an increase in nuclear charge which accompanies the filling
of the inner d orbitals, there is an increase in ionisation enthalpy
along each series of the transition elements from left to right. However,
many small variations occur. Table 8.2 gives the values for the first
three ionisation enthalpies of the first row elements. These values
show that the successive enthalpies of these elements do not increase
as steeply as in the main group elements. Although the first ionisation
enthalpy, in general, increases, the magnitude of the increase in the
second and third ionisation enthalpies for the successive elements,
in general, is much higher.
The irregular trend in the first ionisation enthalpy of the 3d
metals, though of little chemical significance, can be accounted for
by considering that the removal of one electron alters the relative
n
energies of 4s and 3d orbitals. So the unipositive ions have d
configurations with no 4s electrons. There is thus, a reorganisation
energy accompanying ionisation with some gains in exchange energy
as the number of electrons increases and from the transference of s
electrons into d orbitals. There is the generally expected increasing
trend in the values as the effective nuclear charge increases. However,
the value of Cr is lower because of the absence of any change in the
d configuration and the value for Zn higher because it represents an
ionisation from the 4s level. The lowest common oxidation state of
2+
these metals is +2. To form the M ions from the gaseous atoms, the
sum of the first and second ionisation energies is required in addition
to the enthalpy of atomisation for each element. The dominant term
is the second ionisation enthalpy which shows unusually high values
5
10
+
for Cr and Cu where the d and d configurations of the M ions are
disrupted, with considerable loss of exchange energy. The value for
Zn is correspondingly low as the ionisation consists of the removal
10
of an electron which allows the production of the stable d
configuration. The trend in the third ionisation enthalpies is not
complicated by the 4s orbital factor and shows the greater difficulty
5
2+
10
2+
of removing an electron from the d (Mn ) and d (Zn ) ions
superimposed upon the general increasing trend. In general, the
third ionisation enthalpies are quite high and there is a marked
2+
2+
break between the values for Mn and Fe . Also the high values for
215 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18copper, nickel and zinc indicate why it is difficult to obtain oxidation
state greater than two for these elements.
Although ionisation enthalpies give some guidance concerning the
relative stabilities of oxidation states, this problem is very complex and
not amenable to ready generalisation.
8.3.4 Oxidation
States
One of the notable features of a transition element is the great variety
of oxidation states it may show in its compounds. Table 8.3 lists the
common oxidation states of the first row transition elements.
Table 8.3: Oxidation States of the first row Transition Metals
(the most common ones are in bold types)
Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn
+2
+3
+4 +2
+3
+4
+5 +2
+3
+4
+5
+6 +2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7 +2
+3
+4 +2
+3
+4 +2
+3
+4 +1
+2 +2
+3
+6
The elements which give the greatest number of oxidation states
occur in or near the middle of the series. Manganese, for example,
exhibits all the oxidation states from +2 to +7. The lesser number of
oxidation states at the extreme ends stems from either too few electrons
to lose or share (Sc, Ti) or too many d electrons (hence fewer orbitals
available in which to share electrons with others) for higher valence
(Cu, Zn). Thus, early in the series scandium(II) is virtually unknown
and titanium (IV) is more stable than Ti(III) or Ti(II). At the other end,
the only oxidation state of zinc is +2 (no d electrons are involved). The
maximum oxidation states of reasonable stability correspond in value
IV
V
+
to the sum of the s and d electrons upto manganese (Ti O 2 , V O 2 ,
V1
2–
VII
–
Cr O 4 , Mn O 4 ) followed by a rather abrupt decrease in stability of
II,III
higher oxidation states, so that the typical species to follow are Fe ,
II,III
II
I,II
II
Co , Ni , Cu , Zn .
The variability of oxidation states, a characteristic of transition elements,
arises out of incomplete filling of d orbitals in such a way that their
II
III
IV
V
oxidation states differ from each other by unity, e.g., V , V , V , V . This
is in contrast with the variability of oxidation states of non transition
elements where oxidation states normally differ by a unit of two.
An interesting feature in the variability of oxidation states of the d–block
elements is noticed among the groups (groups 4 through 10). Although in
the p–block the lower oxidation states are favoured by the heavier members
(due to inert pair effect), the opposite is true in the groups of d-block. For
example, in group 6, Mo(VI) and W(VI) are found to be more stable than
Cr(VI). Thus Cr(VI) in the form of dichromate in acidic medium is a strong
oxidising agent, whereas MoO 3 and WO 3 are not.
Low oxidation states are found when a complex compound has ligands
capable of π-acceptor character in addition to the σ-bonding. For example,
in Ni(CO) 4 and Fe(CO) 5 , the oxidation state of nickel and iron is zero.
Chemistry 216
2017-18Name a transition element which does not exhibit variable
oxidation states.
Scandium (Z = 21) does not exhibit variable oxidation states.
Example 8.3
Solution
Intext Question
8.3 Which of the 3d series of the transition metals exhibits the
largest number of oxidation states and why?
2+
Table 8.4 contains the thermochemical
parameters
related
to
the
transformation of the solid metal atoms
2+
to M ions in solution and their
standard electrode potentials. The
V
observed values of E and those
calculated using the data of Table 8.4
are compared in Fig. 8.4.
The unique behaviour of Cu,
V
having a positive E , accounts for its
inability to liberate H 2 from acids. Only
oxidising acids (nitric and hot
concentrated sulphuric) react with Cu,
the acids being reduced. The high
energy to transform Cu(s) to Cu 2+ (aq)
is not balanced by its hydration
enthalpy. The general trend towards
V
less negative E values across the
series is related to the general increase
in the sum of the first and second
ionisation enthalpies. It is interesting
V
Fig. 8.4: Observed and calculated values for the standard
to note that the value of E for Mn, Ni
electrode potentials
and Zn are more negative than
(M 2+ → M°) of the elements Ti to Zn
expected from the trend.
8.3.5 Trends in the M /M Standard
Electrode Potentials
Example 8.4
Cr is reducing as its configuration changes from d to d , the latter Solution
Why is Cr 2+ reducing and Mn 3+ oxidising when both have d 4 configuration?
2+
4
3
having a half-filled t 2g level (see Unit 9) . On the other hand, the change
3+
2+
5
from Mn to Mn results in the half-filled (d ) configuration which has
extra stability.
Intext Question
V
2+
8.4 The E (M /M) value for copper is positive (+0.34V). What is possible
V
V
reason for this? (Hint: consider its high ∆ a H and low ∆ hyd H )
217 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18Table 8.4: Thermochemical data (kJ mol -1 ) for the first row Transition
Elements and the Standard Electrode Potentials for the
Reduction of M II to M.
Element (M)
∆ a H
V
V
(M)
∆ i H 1 ∆ 1 H 2
V
∆ hyd H (M 2+ ) V E /V
V
Ti 469 661 1310 -1866 -1.63
V 515 648 1370 -1895 -1.18
Cr 398 653 1590 -1925 -0.90
Mn 279 716 1510 -1862 -1.18
Fe 418 762 1560 -1998 -0.44
Co 427 757 1640 -2079 -0.28
Ni 431 736 1750 -2121 -0.25
Cu 339 745 1960 -2121 0.34
Zn 130 908 1730 -2059 -0.76
2+
The stability of the half-filled d sub-shell in Mn and the completely
V
10
2+
filled d configuration in Zn are related to their E values, whereas
V
V
E for Ni is related to the highest negative ∆ hyd H .
V
3+
2+
8.3.6 Trends in
the M 3+ /M 2+
Standard
Electrode
Potentials An examination of the E (M /M ) values (Table 8.2) shows the varying
3+
trends. The low value for Sc reflects the stability of Sc which has a
noble gas configuration. The highest value for Zn is due to the removal
10
2+
of an electron from the stable d configuration of Zn . The
2+
5
comparatively high value for Mn shows that Mn (d ) is particularly
stable, whereas comparatively low value for Fe shows the extra stability
3+
5
of Fe (d ). The comparatively low value for V is related to the stability
2+
of V (half-filled t 2g level, Unit 9).
8.3.7 Trends in
Stability of
Higher
Oxidation
States Table 8.5 shows the stable halides of the 3d series of transition metals.
The highest oxidation numbers are achieved in TiX 4 (tetrahalides), VF 5
and CrF 6 . The +7 state for Mn is not represented in simple halides but
MnO 3 F is known, and beyond Mn no metal has a trihalide except FeX 3
and CoF 3 . The ability of fluorine to stabilise the highest oxidation state is
due to either higher lattice energy as in the case of CoF 3 , or higher bond
enthalpy terms for the higher covalent compounds, e.g., VF 5 and CrF 6 .
V
Although V is represented only by VF 5 , the other halides, however,
undergo hydrolysis to give oxohalides, VOX 3 . Another feature of fluorides
is their instability in the low oxidation states e.g., VX 2 (X = CI, Br or I)
Table 8.5: Formulas of Halides of 3d Metals
Oxidation
Number
+ 6
CrF 6
VF 5 CrF 5 + 4
+ 5
TiX 4 VX I4 CrX 4 MnF 4
+ 3
+ 2 TiX 3
III
TiX 2 VX 3
VX 2 CrX 3
CrX 2 MnF 3
MnX 2
+ 1
FeX I3
FeX 2
CoF 3
CoX 2
NiX 2
II
CuX 2
ZnX 2
III
CuX
Key: X = F → I; X I = F → Br; X II = F, CI; X III = CI → I
Chemistry 218
2017-18II
and the same applies to CuX. On the other hand, all Cu halides are
2+
–
known except the iodide. In this case, Cu oxidises I to I 2 :
2Cu 2 + + 4I − → Cu 2 I 2 ( s ) + I 2
However, many copper (I) compounds are unstable in aqueous
solution and undergo disproportionation.
+
2+
2Cu → Cu + Cu
2+
+
The stability of Cu (aq) rather than Cu (aq) is due to the much
V
2+
+
more negative ∆ hyd H of Cu (aq) than Cu , which more than
compensates for the second ionisation enthalpy of Cu.
The ability of oxygen to stabilise the highest oxidation state is
demonstrated in the oxides. The highest oxidation number in the oxides
(Table 8.6) coincides with the group number and is attained in Sc 2 O 3
to Mn 2 O 7 . Beyond Group 7, no higher oxides of Fe above Fe 2 O 3 , are
2–
known, although ferrates (VI)(FeO 4 ) , are formed in alkaline media but
they readily decompose to Fe 2 O 3 and O 2 . Besides the oxides, oxocations
v
+
IV
2+
IV
2+
stabilise V as VO 2 , V as VO and Ti as TiO . The ability of oxygen
to stabilise these high oxidation states exceeds that of fluorine. Thus
the highest Mn fluoride is MnF 4 whereas the highest oxide is Mn 2 O 7 .
The ability of oxygen to form multiple bonds to metals explains its
superiority. In the covalent oxide Mn 2 O 7 , each Mn is tetrahedrally
n-
surrounded by O’s including a Mn–O–Mn bridge. The tetrahedral [MO 4 ]
V
Vl
V
Vl
VII
ions are known for V , Cr , Mn , Mn and Mn .
Table 8.6: Oxides of 3d Metals
Oxidation
Number
Groups
3
4
5
6
+ 7
9
10 11 12
NiO CuO ZnO
CrO 3
+ 5
+ 4
+ 2
8
Mn 2 O 7
+ 6
+ 3
7
Sc 2 O 3
TiO 2 V 2 O 5
V 2 O 4 CrO 2 MnO 2 Ti 2 O 3 V 2 O 3 Cr 2 O 3 Mn 2 O 3 Fe 2 O 3 *
4 Mn 3 O Fe 3 O 4 Co 3 O 4
MnO FeO CoO
TiO
VO
(CrO)
*
*
+ 1
*
Cu 2 O
mixed oxides
How would you account for the increasing oxidising power in the
+
2–
–
series VO 2 < Cr 2 O 7 < MnO 4 ? Example 8.5
This is due to the increasing stability of the lower species to which they
are reduced. Solution
Intext Question
8.5 How would you account for the irregular variation of ionisation
enthalpies (first and second) in the first series of the transition elements?
219 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-188.3.8 Chemical
Reactivity
V
and E
Values
Transition metals vary widely in their chemical reactivity. Many of
them are sufficiently electropositive to dissolve in mineral acids, although
a few are ‘noble’—that is, they are unaffected by single acids.
The metals of the first series with the exception of copper are relatively
more reactive and are oxidised by 1M H + , though the actual rate at
+
which these metals react with oxidising agents like hydrogen ion (H ) is
sometimes slow. For example, titanium and vanadium, in practice, are
V
passive to dilute non oxidising acids at room temperature. The E values
2+
for M /M (Table 8.2) indicate a decreasing tendency to form divalent
V
cations across the series. This general trend towards less negative E
values is related to the increase in the sum of the first and second
V
ionisation enthalpies. It is interesting to note that the E values for Mn,
Ni and Zn are more negative than expected from the general trend.
5
2+
Whereas the stabilities of half-filled d subshell (d ) in Mn and completely
10
e
o
filled d subshell (d ) in zinc are related to their E values; for nickel, E
value is related to the highest negative enthalpy of hydration.
V
3+
2+
An examination of the E values for the redox couple M /M (Table
3+
3+
8.2) shows that Mn and Co ions are the strongest oxidising agents
2+
2+
2+
in aqueous solutions. The ions Ti , V and Cr are strong reducing
agents and will liberate hydrogen from a dilute acid, e.g.,
2+
+
3+
2 Cr (aq) + 2 H (aq) → 2 Cr (aq) + H 2 (g)
Example 8.6 For the first row transition metals the E o values are:
o
E
V
Cr
Mn
Fe
Co
2+
(M /M) –1.18 – 0.91 –1.18 – 0.44 – 0.28
Explain the irregularity in the above values.
Ni
– 0.25
Cu
+0.34
Solution The E V (M 2+ /M) values are not regular which can be explained from
the irregular variation of ionisation enthalpies ( ∆ i H 1 + ∆ i H 2 ) and also
the sublimation enthalpies which are relatively much less for
manganese and vanadium.
Example 8.7 Why is the E V value for the Mn 3+ /Mn 2+ couple much more positive
3+
than that for Cr /Cr
2+
3+
2+
or Fe /Fe ? Explain.
Solution Much larger third ionisation energy of Mn (where the required change
5
4
is d to d ) is mainly responsible for this. This also explains why the
+3 state of Mn is of little importance.
Intext Questions
8.6 Why is the highest oxidation state of a metal exhibited in its oxide or
fluoride only?
2+
2+
8.7 Which is a stronger reducing agent Cr or Fe and why ?
8.3.9 Magnetic
Properties
When a magnetic field is applied to substances, mainly two types of
magnetic behaviour are observed: diamagnetism and paramagnetism
(Unit 1). Diamagnetic substances are repelled by the applied field while
the paramagnetic substances are attracted. Substances which are
Chemistry 220
2017-18attracted very strongly are said to be ferromagnetic. In fact,
ferromagnetism is an extreme form of paramagnetism. Many of the
transition metal ions are paramagnetic.
Paramagnetism arises from the presence of unpaired electrons, each
such electron having a magnetic moment associated with its spin angular
momentum and orbital angular momentum. For the compounds of the
first series of transition metals, the contribution of the orbital angular
momentum is effectively quenched and hence is of no significance. For
these, the magnetic moment is determined by the number of unpaired
electrons and is calculated by using the ‘spin-only’ formula, i.e.,
μ=
n ( n + 2 )
where n is the number of unpaired electrons and μ is the magnetic
moment in units of Bohr magneton (BM). A single unpaired electron
has a magnetic moment of 1.73 Bohr magnetons (BM).
The magnetic moment increases with the increasing number of
unpaired electrons. Thus, the observed magnetic moment gives a useful
indication about the number of unpaired electrons present in the atom,
molecule or ion. The magnetic moments calculated from the ‘spin-only’
formula and those derived experimentally for some ions of the first row
transition elements are given in Table 8.7. The experimental data are
mainly for hydrated ions in solution or in the solid state.
Table 8.7: Calculated and Observed Magnetic Moments (BM)
Ion
Configuration
Unpaired
electron(s)
Magnetic moment
Calculated
Observed
Sc 3+ 3d 0 0 0 0
3+ 1 3d 1 1.73 1.75
Tl 2+ 3d 2 2 2.84 2.76
2+ 3 3 3.87 3.86
Cr 4 3d 4 4.90 4.80
Mn 2+ 3d 5 5 5.92 5.96
Ti
V
2+
2+
3d
Fe 6 3d 4 4.90 5.3 – 5.5
Co 2+ 3d 7 3 3.87 4.4 – 5.2
Ni 2+ 3d 8 2 2.84 2.9 – 3, 4
9 3d 1 1.73 1.8 – 2.2
3d 10 0 0
Cu
2+
Zn 2+
Calculate the magnetic moment of a divalent ion in aqueous solution
if its atomic number is 25. Example 8.8
With atomic number 25, the divalent ion in aqueous solution will have
5
d configuration (five unpaired electrons). The magnetic moment, μ is Solution
μ = 5 ( 5 + 2 ) = 5.92 BM
221 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18Intext Question
2+
(aq)
8.8 Calculate the ‘spin only’ magnetic moment of M
8.3.10 Formation
of Coloured
Ions
ion (Z = 27).
When an electron from a lower energy d orbital is excited to a higher
energy d orbital, the energy of excitation corresponds to the frequency
of light absorbed (Unit 9). This frequency generally lies in the visible
region. The colour observed corresponds to the complementary colour
of the light absorbed. The
frequency of the light
absorbed is determined by
the nature of the ligand.
In aqueous solutions
where water molecules are
the ligands, the colours
of the ions observed are
listed in Table 8.8. A few
coloured solutions of Fig. 8.5: Colours of some of the first row
d–block elements are transition metal ions in aqueous solutions. From
left to right: V 4+ ,V 3+ ,Mn 2+ ,Fe 3+ ,Co 2+ ,Ni 2+ and Cu 2+ .
illustrated in Fig. 8.5.
Table 8.8: Colours of Some of the First Row (aquated)
Transition Metal Ions
Configuration
0
3d
3d 0
3d 1
3d 1
2
3d
3
3d
3
3d
4
3d
4
3d
5
3d
5
3d
6
3d
6
7
3d 3d
3d 8
3d 9
3d 10
8.3.11 Formation
of Complex
Compounds
Example Colour
3+ colourless
colourless
purple
blue
green
violet
violet
violet
blue
pink
yellow
green
bluepink
green
blue
colourless
Sc
Ti 4+
Ti 3+
V 4+
3+
V
2+
V
3+
Cr
3+
Mn
2+
Cr
2+
Mn
3+
Fe
2+
Fe
3+
2+
Co Co
Ni 2+
Cu 2+
Zn 2+
Complex compounds are those in which the metal ions bind a number
of anions or neutral molecules giving complex species with
3–
4–
characteristic properties. A few examples are: [Fe(CN) 6 ] , [Fe(CN) 6 ] ,
2+
2–
[Cu(NH 3 ) 4 ] and [PtCl 4 ] . (The chemistry of complex compounds is
Chemistry 222
2017-18dealt with in detail in Unit 9). The transition metals form a large
number of complex compounds. This is due to the comparatively
smaller sizes of the metal ions, their high ionic charges and the
availability of d orbitals for bond formation.
8.3.12 Catalytic
Properties
The transition metals and their compounds are known for their catalytic
activity. This activity is ascribed to their ability to adopt multiple
oxidation states and to form complexes. Vanadium(V) oxide (in Contact
Process), finely divided iron (in Haber’s Process), and nickel (in Catalytic
Hydrogenation) are some of the examples. Catalysts at a solid surface
involve the formation of bonds between reactant molecules and atoms
of the surface of the catalyst (first row transition metals utilise 3d and
4s electrons for bonding). This has the effect of increasing the
concentration of the reactants at the catalyst surface and also weakening
of the bonds in the reacting molecules (the activation energy is lowering).
Also because the transition metal ions can change their oxidation states,
they become more effective as catalysts. For example, iron(III) catalyses
the reaction between iodide and persulphate ions.
–
2–
2–
2 I + S 2 O 8 → I 2 + 2 SO 4
An explanation of this catalytic action can be given as:
3+
–
2+
2 Fe + 2 I → 2 Fe + I 2
2+
2 Fe
2–
+ S 2 O 8
3+
→ 2 Fe
+ 2SO 4
2–
8.3.13 Formation
of
Interstitial
Compounds Interstitial compounds are those which are formed when small atoms
like H, C or N are trapped inside the crystal lattices of metals. They are
usually non stoichiometric and are neither typically ionic nor covalent,
for example, TiC, Mn 4 N, Fe 3 H, VH 0 . 56 and TiH 1.7 , etc. The formulas
quoted do not, of course, correspond to any normal oxidation state of
the metal. Because of the nature of their composition, these compounds
are referred to as interstitial compounds. The principal physical and
chemical characteristics of these compounds are as follows:
(i) They have high melting points, higher than those of pure metals.
(ii) They are very hard, some borides approach diamond in hardness.
(iii) They retain metallic conductivity.
(iv) They are chemically inert.
8.3.14 Alloy
Formation An alloy is a blend of metals prepared by mixing the components.
Alloys may be homogeneous solid solutions in which the atoms of one
metal are distributed randomly among the atoms of the other. Such
alloys are formed by atoms with metallic radii that are within about 15
percent of each other. Because of similar radii and other characteristics
of transition metals, alloys are readily formed by these metals. The
alloys so formed are hard and have often high melting points. The best
known are ferrous alloys: chromium, vanadium, tungsten, molybdenum
and manganese are used for the production of a variety of steels and
stainless steel. Alloys of transition metals with non transition metals
such as brass (copper-zinc) and bronze (copper-tin), are also of
considerable industrial importance.
223 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18Example 8.9 What is meant by ‘disproportionation’ of an oxidation state? Give an
example.
Solution When a particular oxidation state becomes less stable relative to other
oxidation states, one lower, one higher, it is said to undergo disproportionation.
For example, manganese (VI) becomes unstable relative to manganese(VII) and
manganese (IV) in acidic solution.
VI
3 Mn O 4
2–
+
VII
–
IV
+ 4 H → 2 Mn O 4 + Mn O 2 + 2H 2 O
Intext Question
+
8.9 Explain why Cu ion is not stable in aqueous solutions?
8 . 4 Some
Important
Compounds of
Transition
Elements
8.4.1 Oxides and Oxoanions of Metals
These oxides are generally formed by the reaction of metals with
oxygen at high temperatures. All the metals except scandium form
MO oxides which are ionic. The highest oxidation number in the
oxides, coincides with the group number and is attained in Sc 2 O 3 to
Mn 2 O 7 . Beyond group 7, no higher oxides of iron above Fe 2 O 3 are
V
+
IV
known. Besides the oxides, the oxocations stabilise V as VO 2 , V as
2+
IV
2+
VO and Ti as TiO .
As the oxidation number of a metal increases, ionic character
decreases. In the case of Mn, Mn 2 O 7 is a covalent green oil. Even CrO 3
and V 2 O 5 have low melting points. In these higher oxides, the acidic
character is predominant.
Thus, Mn 2 O 7 gives HMnO 4 and CrO 3 gives H 2 CrO 4 and H 2 Cr 2 O 7 .
3–
V 2 O 5 is, however, amphoteric though mainly acidic and it gives VO 4 as
+
well as VO 2 salts. In vanadium there is gradual change from the basic
V 2 O 3 to less basic V 2 O 4 and to amphoteric V 2 O 5 . V 2 O 4 dissolves in acids
2+
to give VO salts. Similarly, V 2 O 5 reacts with alkalies as well as acids
to give VO 34 − and VO 4 + respectively. The well characterised CrO is basic
but Cr 2 O 3 is amphoteric.
Potassium dichromate K 2 Cr 2 O 7
Potassium dichromate is a very important chemical used in leather
industry and as an oxidant for preparation of many azo compounds.
Dichromates are generally prepared from chromate, which in turn are
obtained by the fusion of chromite ore (FeCr 2 O 4 ) with sodium or
potassium carbonate in free access of air. The reaction with sodium
carbonate occurs as follows:
4 FeCr 2 O 4 + 8 Na 2 CO 3 + 7 O 2 → 8 Na 2 CrO 4 + 2 Fe 2 O 3 + 8 CO 2
The yellow solution of sodium chromate is filtered and acidified
with sulphuric acid to give a solution from which orange sodium
dichromate, Na 2 Cr 2 O 7 . 2H 2 O can be crystallised.
+
+
2Na 2 CrO 4 + 2 H → Na 2 Cr 2 O 7 + 2 Na + H 2 O
Chemistry 224
2017-18Sodium dichromate is more soluble than potassium dichromate.
The latter is therefore, prepared by treating the solution of sodium
dichromate with potassium chloride.
Na 2 Cr 2 O 7 + 2 KCl → K 2 Cr 2 O 7 + 2 NaCl
Orange crystals of potassium dichromate crystallise out. The
chromates and dichromates are interconvertible in aqueous solution
depending upon pH of the solution. The oxidation state of chromium
in chromate and dichromate is the same.
2–
+
2–
2 CrO 4 + 2H → Cr 2 O 7 + H 2 O
2–
-
2–
Cr 2 O 7 + 2 OH → 2 CrO 4 + H 2 O
The
structures
of
2–
chromate ion, CrO 4 and
2–
the dichromate ion, Cr 2 O 7
are shown below. The
chromate ion is tetrahedral
whereas the dichromate ion
consists of two tetrahedra
sharing one corner with
Cr–O–Cr bond angle of 126°.
Sodium and potassium dichromates are strong oxidising agents;
the sodium salt has a greater solubility in water and is extensively
used as an oxidising agent in organic chemistry. Potassium dichromate
is used as a primary standard in volumetric analysis. In acidic solution,
its oxidising action can be represented as follows:
V
2–
+
–
3+
Cr 2 O 7 + 14H + 6e → 2Cr + 7H 2 O (E = 1.33V)
Thus, acidified potassium dichromate will oxidise iodides to iodine,
sulphides to sulphur, tin(II) to tin(IV) and iron(II) salts to iron(III). The
half-reactions are noted below:
–
–
2+
4+
–
6 I → 3I 2 + 6 e ;
3 Sn → 3Sn + 6 e
+
–
2+
3+
–
3 H 2 S → 6H + 3S + 6e ;
6 Fe → 6Fe + 6 e
The full ionic equation may be obtained by adding the half-reaction for
potassium dichromate to the half-reaction for the reducing agent, for e.g.,
2–
+
2+
3+
3+
Cr 2 O 7 + 14 H + 6 Fe → 2 Cr + 6 Fe + 7 H 2 O
Potassium permanganate KMnO 4
Potassium permanganate is prepared by fusion of MnO 2 with an alkali
metal hydroxide and an oxidising agent like KNO 3 . This produces the
dark green K 2 MnO 4 which disproportionates in a neutral or acidic
solution to give permanganate.
2MnO 2 + 4KOH + O 2 → 2K 2 MnO 4 + 2H 2 O
3MnO 42– + 4H + → 2MnO 4– + MnO 2 + 2H 2 O
Commercially it is prepared by the alkaline oxidative fusion of MnO 2
followed by the electrolytic oxidation of manganate (Vl).
F used with KOH, oxidise d
with air or KNO 3
MnO 2 
→ MnO 2 4 −
manganate ion
;
MnO
2 −
4
Electrolytic oxidation in
alkaline solution

→ MnO − 4
manganate
permanganate ion
225 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18In the laboratory, a manganese (II) ion salt is oxidised by
peroxodisulphate to permanganate.
2+
2–
–
2–
+
2Mn + 5S 2 O 8 + 8H 2 O → 2MnO 4 + 10SO 4 + 16H
Potassium permanganate forms dark purple (almost black) crystals which
are isostructural with those of KClO 4 . The salt is not very soluble in water
(6.4 g/100 g of water at 293 K), but when heated it decomposes at 513 K.
2KMnO 4 → K 2 MnO 4 + MnO 2 + O 2
It has two physical properties of considerable interest: its intense colour
and its diamagnetism along with temperature-dependent weak
paramagnetism. These can be explained by the use of molecular orbital
theory which is beyond the present scope.
The manganate and permanganate ions are tetrahedral; the π-
bonding takes place by overlap of p orbitals of oxygen with d orbitals
of manganese. The green manganate is paramagnetic because of one
unpaired electron but the permanganate is diamagnetic due to the
absence of unpaired electron.
Acidified permanganate solution oxidises oxalates to carbon dioxide,
iron(II) to iron(III), nitrites to nitrates and iodides to free iodine.
The half-reactions of reductants are:
COO –
5
10 CO 2 + 10e –
–
COO
5 Fe 2+ → 5 Fe 3+ + 5e –
5NO 2– + 5H 2 O → 5NO 3– + 10H + + l0e –
10I – → 5I 2 + 10e –
The full reaction can be written by adding the half-reaction for
KMnO 4 to the half-reaction of the reducing agent, balancing wherever
necessary.
If we represent the reduction of permanganate to manganate,
manganese dioxide and manganese(II) salt by half-reactions,
MnO 4– + e – → MnO 42–
(E V = + 0.56 V)
–
+
–
MnO 4 + 4H + 3e → MnO 2 + 2H 2 O
(E V = + 1.69 V)
MnO 4– + 8H + + 5e – → Mn 2+ + 4H 2 O
(E V = + 1.52 V)
We can very well see that the hydrogen ion concentration of the
solution plays an important part in influencing the reaction. Although
many reactions can be understood by consideration of redox potential,
kinetics of the reaction is also an important factor. Permanganate at
+
[H ] = 1 should oxidise water but in practice the reaction is extremely slow
unless either manganese(ll) ions are present or the temperature is raised.
A few important oxidising reactions of KMnO 4 are given below:
1. In acid solutions:
(a) Iodine is liberated from potassium iodide :
–
–
+
2+
10I + 2MnO 4 + 16H ——> 2Mn + 8H 2 O + 5I 2
2+
3+
(b) Fe ion (green) is converted to Fe (yellow):
2+
–
+
2+
3+
5Fe + MnO 4 + 8H ——> Mn + 4H 2 O + 5Fe
Chemistry 226
2017-18(c) Oxalate ion or oxalic acid is oxidised at 333 K:
2–
–
+
2+
5C 2 O 4 + 2MnO 4 + 16H ——> 2Mn + 8H 2 O + 10CO 2
(d) Hydrogen sulphide is oxidised, sulphur being precipitated:
+
2–
H 2 S —> 2H + S
2–
–
+
2+
5S + 2MnO 4 + 16H ——> 2Mn + 8H 2 O + 5S
(e) Sulphurous acid or sulphite is oxidised to a sulphate or
sulphuric acid:
2–
–
+
2+
2–
5SO 3 + 2MnO 4 + 6H ——> 2Mn + 3H 2 O + 5SO 4
(f) Nitrite is oxidised to nitrate:
–
–
+
2+
–
5NO 2 + 2MnO 4 + 6H ——> 2Mn + 5NO 3 + 3H 2 O
2. In neutral or faintly alkaline solutions:
(a) A notable reaction is the oxidation of iodide to iodate:
–
–
–
–
2MnO 4 + H 2 O + I ——> 2MnO 2 + 2OH + IO 3
(b) Thiosulphate is oxidised almost quantitatively to sulphate:
–
2–
2–
–
8MnO 4 + 3S 2 O 3 + H 2 O ——> 8MnO 2 + 6SO 4 + 2OH
(c) Manganous salt is oxidised to MnO 2 ; the presence of zinc sulphate
or zinc oxide catalyses the oxidation:
–
2+
+
2MnO 4 + 3Mn + 2H 2 O ——> 5MnO 2 + 4H
Note: Permanganate titrations in presence of hydrochloric acid are
unsatisfactory since hydrochloric acid is oxidised to chlorine.
Uses
Uses: Besides its use in analytical chemistry, potassium permanganate is
used as a favourite oxidant in preparative organic chemistry. Its uses for the
bleaching of wool, cotton, silk and other textile fibres and for the decolourisation
of oils are also dependent on its strong oxidising power.
THE INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS ( f-BLOCK)
The f-block consists of the two series, lanthanoids (the fourteen elements
following lanthanum) and actinoids (the fourteen elements following
actinium). Because lanthanum closely resembles the lanthanoids, it is
usually included in any discussion of the lanthanoids for which the
general symbol Ln is often used. Similarly, a discussion of the actinoids
includes actinium besides the fourteen elements constituting the series.
The lanthanoids resemble one another more closely than do the members
of ordinary transition elements in any series. They have only one stable
oxidation state and their chemistry provides an excellent opportunity to
examine the effect of small changes in size and nuclear charge along a
series of otherwise similar elements. The chemistry of the actinoids is, on
the other hand, much more complicated. The complication arises partly
owing to the occurrence of a wide range of oxidation states in these
elements and partly because their radioactivity creates special problems
in their study; the two series will be considered separately here.
8 . 5 The
Lanthanoids
The names, symbols, electronic configurations of atomic and some
ionic states and atomic and ionic radii of lanthanum and lanthanoids
(for which the general symbol Ln is used) are given in Table 8.9.
227 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18It may be noted that atoms of these elements have electronic
2
configuration with 6s common but with variable occupancy of 4f level
(Table 8.9). However, the electronic configurations of all the tripositive
ions (the most stable oxidation state of all the lanthanoids) are of the
form 4f n (n = 1 to 14 with increasing atomic number).
8.5.1 Electronic
Configurations
8.5.2 Atomic and
Ionic Sizes
The overall decrease in atomic and ionic radii from lanthanum to
lutetium (the lanthanoid contraction) is a unique feature in the
chemistry of the lanthanoids. It has far reaching
consequences in the chemistry of the third
Sm
110
transition series of the elements. The decrease
Eu
in atomic radii (derived from the structures of
metals) is not quite regular as it is regular in
La
3+
M ions (Fig. 8.6). This contraction is, of
Ce
course, similar to that observed in an ordinary
transition series and is attributed to the same
Pr
cause, the imperfect shielding of one electron
100
Nd
by another in the same sub-shell. However, the
Pm
shielding of one 4 f electron by another is less
Sm
Eu
than one d electron by another with the increase
Tm
Gd
in nuclear charge along the series. There is
Yb
Tb
Ce
fairly regular decrease in the sizes with
Dy
increasing atomic number.
Pr
Ho
90
The cumulative effect of the contraction of
Er
Tm
the lanthanoid series, known as lanthanoid
Yb
contraction, causes the radii of the members
Lu
Tb
of the third transition series to be very similar
to those of the corresponding members of the
second series. The almost identical radii of Zr
(160 pm) and Hf (159 pm), a consequence of
57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71
the lanthanoid contraction, account for their
Atomic number
occurrence together in nature and for the
Fig. 8.6: Trends in ionic radii of lanthanoids
difficulty faced in their separation.
2 +
2+
3+
3+
3+
3+
3+
3+
3+
2+
3+
2+
3+
4+
3+
4+
3+
3+
3+
3+
3+
4+
8.5.3 Oxidation
States
In the lanthanoids, La(II) and Ln(III) compounds are predominant
species. However, occasionally +2 and +4 ions in solution or in solid
compounds are also obtained. This irregularity (as in ionisation
enthalpies) arises mainly from the extra stability of empty, half-filled
IV
or filled f subshell. Thus, the formation of Ce is favoured by its
noble gas configuration, but it is a strong oxidant reverting to the
o
4+
3+
common +3 state. The E value for Ce / Ce is + 1.74 V which
suggests that it can oxidise water. However, the reaction rate is very
slow and hence Ce(IV) is a good analytical reagent. Pr, Nd, Tb and Dy
2+
also exhibit +4 state but only in oxides, MO 2 . Eu is formed by losing
7
the two s electrons and its f configuration accounts for the formation
2+
of this ion. However, Eu is a strong reducing agent changing to the
2+
14
common +3 state. Similarly Yb which has f
configuration is a
IV
reductant. Tb has half-filled f-orbitals and is an oxidant. The
behaviour of samarium is very much like europium, exhibiting both
+2 and +3 oxidation states.
Chemistry 228
2017-18Table 8.9: Electronic Configurations and Radii of Lanthanum and Lanthanoids
Electronic configurations*
Atomic
Number
Name
Symbol
Ln
1
Ln
2
57 Lanthanum La 5d 6s
58 Cerium Ce 4f 5d 6s
59 Praseodymium Pr 4f 6s
3
2
Nd 4
2
4f 6s
Pm 5
2
4f 6s
6
2
60
61
Neodymium
Promethium
1
2+
1
2
187 106
4f 1 4f 0 183 103
4f 3 4f 2 4f 1 182 101
4f 4 4f 3 4f 2 181 99
4f 5 4f 4 181 98
4f 5 180 96
4f 6 199 95
4f 7 4f 8 4f 6s 4f Eu 4f 6s 7 2 4f 7
7 1 9 2 Gd 4f 5d 6s
Terbium Tb 4f 6s
Dy
7
4f 5d
4f 9
94
7 178 92
4f 8 4f 4f 10 4f 9 177 91
2 4f 11 4f 10 176 89
4f 12 4f 11 175 88
4f 12 174 87
4f 13 173 86
4f 14 – –
6s
Holmium Ho 4f 68 Erbium Er 4f 12 2 2 4f 13
4f 14
4f 14
6s
6s
69 Thulium Tm 4f 13 70 Ytterbium Yb 4f 14 2
4f 14 1
Lu
180 4f 2 67
Lutetium
1
10 11
71
3+
2 Sm Gadolinium
Ln
4f Europium 65
Ln
0 Samarium 64 Ln 4f 63
2
Radii/pm
4+
1 62
Dysprosium
Ln
5d
6
66
3+
6s
6s
2
5d 6s
1
5d
–
* Only electrons outside [Xe] core are indicated
8.5.4 General
Characteristics
All the lanthanoids are silvery white soft metals and tarnish rapidly in air.
The hardness increases with increasing atomic number, samarium being
steel hard. Their melting points range between 1000 to 1200 K but
samarium melts at 1623 K. They have typical metallic structure and are
good conductors of heat and electricity. Density and other properties
change smoothly except for Eu and Yb and occasionally for Sm and Tm.
Many trivalent lanthanoid ions are coloured both in the solid state
and in aqueous solutions. Colour of these ions may be attributed to
3+
3+
the presence of f electrons. Neither La nor Lu ion shows any colour
but the rest do so. However, absorption bands are narrow, probably
because of the excitation within f level. The lanthanoid ions other than
0
3+
4+
14
2+
3+
the f type (La and Ce ) and the f
type (Yb and Lu ) are all
paramagnetic. The paramagnetism rises to maximum in neodymium.
The first ionisation enthalpies of the lanthanoids are around
–1
–1
600 kJ mol , the second about 1200 kJ mol comparable with those
of calcium. A detailed discussion of the variation of the third ionisation
enthalpies indicates that the exchange enthalpy considerations (as in
3d orbitals of the first transition series), appear to impart a certain
degree of stability to empty, half-filled and completely filled orbitals
f level. This is indicated from the abnormally low value of the third
ionisation enthalpy of lanthanum, gadolinium and lutetium.
In their chemical behaviour, in general, the earlier members of the series
are quite reactive similar to calcium but, with increasing atomic number,
V
they behave more like aluminium. Values for E for the half-reaction:
3+
–
Ln (aq) + 3e → Ln(s)
229 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18are in the range of –2.2 to –2.4 V
except for Eu for which the value is
– 2.0 V. This is, of course, a small
variation. The metals combine with
hydrogen when gently heated in the
gas. The carbides, Ln 3 C, Ln 2 C 3 and LnC 2
are formed when the metals are heated
with halogen
Ln
with carbon. They liberate hydrogen
heated with S
s
LnX 3
Ln 2 S 3
from dilute acids and burn in halogens
to form halides. They form oxides M 2 O 3
and
hydroxides
M(OH) 3 .
The
hydroxides are definite compounds, not
just hydrated oxides. They are basic
like alkaline earth metal oxides and
Ln N
LnC 2
Ln(OH) 3 + H 2
hydroxides. Their general reactions are
depicted in Fig. 8.7.
Fig 8.7: Chemical reactions of the lanthanoids.
The best single use of the
lanthanoids is for the production of alloy steels for plates and pipes. A
well known alloy is mischmetall which consists of a lanthanoid metal
(~ 95%) and iron (~ 5%) and traces of S, C, Ca and Al. A good deal of
mischmetall is used in Mg-based alloy to produce bullets, shell and
lighter flint. Mixed oxides of lanthanoids are employed as catalysts in
petroleum cracking. Some individual Ln oxides are used as phosphors
in television screens and similar fluorescing surfaces.
Ln 2 O 3
H 2
8 . 6 The Actinoids
The actinoids include the fourteen elements from Th to Lr. The names,
symbols and some properties of these elements are given in Table 8.10.
Table 8.10: Some Properties of Actinium and Actinoids
Electronic conifigurations*
Atomic
Number
89
Name
Actinium
Symbol
3+
M
M
Ac 6d 7s 1 2
2 2
90 Thorium Th 6d 7s
91 Protactinium Pa 5f 6d 7s
92 Uranium
93 Neptunium
94
Plutonium
5f 1
5f 2
111
5f 0 99
5f 1 96
5f 2 103 93
5f 3 101 92
100 90
3 1 2 5f 3 4 1 2 5f 4 Pu 6 5f 7s 2 5f 5 5f 4 7 5f 6 5f 5 99 89
5f 7 5f 6 99 88
5f 8 5f 7 98 87
5f 9 5f 8 98 86
U 5f 6d 7s
Np 5f 6d 7s
Americium Am 5f 7s
Curium Cm 5f 6d 7s
7
1
97 Berkelium Bk 5f 7s
9
2
Einstenium
0
4+
M
2 95
99
5f
3+
M
1 96
Californium
M
2 2
98
Radii/pm
4+
Cf
Es
5f 10 5f 11 7s
7s
100 Fermium Fm 5f 12
101 Mendelevium Md 5f 13
102 Nobelium No 5f 14
103 Lawrencium Lr 5f 14
2
2
7s
2
5f 10 5f 9 – –
2 5f 11 5f 10 – –
2 5f 12 5f 11 – –
5f 13 5f 12 – –
5f 14 5f 13 – –
7s
2
7s
1
6d 7s
2
Chemistry 230
2017-18The actinoids are radioactive elements and the earlier members have
relatively long half-lives, the latter ones have half-life values ranging from
a day to 3 minutes for lawrencium (Z =103). The latter members could be
prepared only in nanogram quantities. These facts render their study
more difficult.
2
8.6.1 Electronic
Configurations All the actinoids are believed to have the electronic configuration of 7s
and variable occupancy of the 5f and 6d subshells. The fourteen electrons
are formally added to 5f, though not in thorium (Z = 90) but from Pa
onwards the 5f orbitals are complete at element 103. The irregularities in
the electronic configurations of the actinoids, like those in the lanthanoids
0
7
14
are related to the stabilities of the f , f and f occupancies of the 5f
7
2
orbitals. Thus, the configurations of Am and Cm are [Rn] 5f 7s and
7
1
2
[Rn] 5f 6d 7s . Although the 5f orbitals resemble the 4f orbitals in their
angular part of the wave-function, they are not as buried as 4f orbitals
and hence 5f electrons can participate in bonding to a far greater extent.
8.6.2 Ionic Sizes The general trend in lanthanoids is observable in the actinoids as well.
3+
There is a gradual decrease in the size of atoms or M ions across the
series. This may be referred to as the actinoid contraction (like lanthanoid
contraction). The contraction is, however, greater from element to element
in this series resulting from poor shielding by 5f electrons.
8.6.3 Oxidation
States There is a greater range of oxidation states, which is in part attributed to
the fact that the 5f, 6d and 7s levels are of comparable energies. The
known oxidation states of actinoids are listed in Table 8.11.
The actinoids show in general +3 oxidation state. The elements, in the
first half of the series frequently exhibit higher oxidation states. For example,
the maximum oxidation state increases from +4 in Th to +5, +6 and +7
respectively in Pa, U and Np but decreases in succeeding elements (Table
8.11). The actinoids resemble the lanthanoids in having more compounds
in +3 state than in the +4 state. However, +3 and +4 ions tend to hydrolyse.
Because the distribution of oxidation states among the actinoids is so
uneven and so different for the former and later elements, it is unsatisfactory
to review their chemistry in terms of oxidation states.
Table 8.11: Oxidation States of Actinium and Actinoids
Ac
Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
3
4
5 3
4
5
6 3
4
5
6
7 3
4
5
6
7 3
4
5
6 3
4 3
4 3 3 3 3 3 3
4
3
8.6.4 General
Characteristics
and Comparison
with Lanthanoids
The actinoid metals are all silvery in appearance but display
a variety of structures. The structural variability is obtained
due to irregularities in metallic radii which are far greater
than in lanthanoids.
231 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18The actinoids are highly reactive metals, especially when finely divided.
The action of boiling water on them, for example, gives a mixture of oxide
and hydride and combination with most non metals takes place at
moderate temperatures. Hydrochloric acid attacks all metals but most are
slightly affected by nitric acid owing to the formation of protective oxide
layers; alkalies have no action.
The magnetic properties of the actinoids are more complex than those
of the lanthanoids. Although the variation in the magnetic susceptibility
of the actinoids with the number of unpaired 5 f electrons is roughly
parallel to the corresponding results for the lanthanoids, the latter have
higher values.
It is evident from the behaviour of the actinoids that the ionisation
enthalpies of the early actinoids, though not accurately known, but are
lower than for the early lanthanoids. This is quite reasonable since it is to
be expected that when 5f orbitals are beginning to be occupied, they will
penetrate less into the inner core of electrons. The 5f electrons, will therefore,
be more effectively shielded from the nuclear charge than the 4f electrons
of the corresponding lanthanoids. Because the outer electrons are less
firmly held, they are available for bonding in the actinoids.
A comparison of the actinoids with the lanthanoids, with respect to
different characteristics as discussed above, reveals that behaviour similar
to that of the lanthanoids is not evident until the second half of the
actinoid series. However, even the early actinoids resemble the lanthanoids
in showing close similarities with each other and in gradual variation in
properties which do not entail change in oxidation state. The lanthanoid
and actinoid contractions, have extended effects on the sizes, and
therefore, the properties of the elements succeeding them in their
respective periods. The lanthanoid contraction is more important because
the chemistry of elements succeeding the actinoids are much less known
at the present time.
Example 8.10 Name a member of the lanthanoid series which is well known
to exhibit +4 oxidation state.
Solution Cerium (Z = 58)
Intext Question
8.10 Actinoid contraction is greater from element to element than
lanthanoid contraction. Why?
8.7 Some
Applications
of d- and
f-Block
Elements
Iron and steels are the most important construction materials. Their
production is based on the reduction of iron oxides, the removal of
impurities and the addition of carbon and alloying metals such as Cr, Mn
and Ni. Some compounds are manufactured for special purposes such as
TiO for the pigment industry and MnO 2 for use in dry battery cells. The
battery industry also requires Zn and Ni/Cd. The elements of Group 11
are still worthy of being called the coinage metals, although Ag and Au
Chemistry 232
2017-18are restricted to collection items and the contemporary UK ‘copper’ coins
are copper-coated steel. The ‘silver’ UK coins are a Cu/Ni alloy. Many of
the metals and/or their compounds are essential catalysts in the chemical
industry. V 2 O 5 catalyses the oxidation of SO 2 in the manufacture of
sulphuric acid. TiCl 4 with A1(CH 3 ) 3 forms the basis of the Ziegler catalysts
used to manufacture polyethylene (polythene). Iron catalysts are used in
the Haber process for the production of ammonia from N 2 /H 2 mixtures.
Nickel catalysts enable the hydrogenation of fats to proceed. In the Wacker
process the oxidation of ethyne to ethanal is catalysed by PdCl 2 . Nickel
complexes are useful in the polymerisation of alkynes and other organic
compounds such as benzene. The photographic industry relies on the
special light-sensitive properties of AgBr.
Summary
The d-block consisting of Groups 3-12 occupies the large middle section of the periodic
table. In these elements the inner d orbitals are progressively filled. The f-block is placed
outside at the bottom of the periodic table and in the elements of this block, 4f and
5f orbitals are progressively filled.
Corresponding to the filling of 3d, 4d and 5d orbitals, three series of transition
elements are well recognised. All the transition elements exhibit typical metallic properties
such as –high tensile strength, ductility, malleability, thermal and electrical conductivity
and metallic character. Their melting and boiling points are high which are attributed
to the involvement of (n –1) d electrons resulting into strong interatomic bonding. In
many of these properties, the maxima occur at about the middle of each series which
indicates that one unpaired electron per d orbital is particularly a favourable configuration
for strong interatomic interaction.
Successive ionisation enthalpies do not increase as steeply as in the main group
elements with increasing atomic number. Hence, the loss of variable number of electrons
from (n –1) d orbitals is not energetically unfavourable. The involvement of (n –1) d electrons
in the behaviour of transition elements impart certain distinct characteristics to these
elements. Thus, in addition to variable oxidation states, they exhibit paramagnetic
behaviour, catalytic properties and tendency for the formation of coloured ions, interstitial
compounds and complexes.
The transition elements vary widely in their chemical behaviour. Many of them are
sufficiently electropositive to dissolve in mineral acids, although a few are ‘noble’. Of the
first series, with the exception of copper, all the metals are relatively reactive.
The transition metals react with a number of non-metals like oxygen, nitrogen,
sulphur and halogens to form binary compounds. The first series transition metal oxides
are generally formed from the reaction of metals with oxygen at high temperatures. These
oxides dissolve in acids and bases to form oxometallic salts. Potassium dichromate and
potassium permanganate are common examples. Potassium dichromate is prepared from
the chromite ore by fusion with alkali in presence of air and acidifying the extract.
Pyrolusite ore (MnO 2 ) is used for the preparation of potassium permanganate. Both the
dichromate and the permanganate ions are strong oxidising agents.
The two series of inner transition elements, lanthanoids and actinoids constitute
the f-block of the periodic table. With the successive filling of the inner orbitals, 4f, there
is a gradual decrease in the atomic and ionic sizes of these metals along the series
(lanthanoid contraction). This has far reaching consequences in the chemistry of the
elements succeeding them. Lanthanum and all the lanthanoids are rather soft white
metals. They react easily with water to give solutions giving +3 ions. The principal
oxidation state is +3, although +4 and +2 oxidation states are also exhibited by some
233 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-18occasionally. The chemistry of the actinoids is more complex in view of their ability to
exist in different oxidation states. Furthermore, many of the actinoid elements are radioactive
which make the study of these elements rather difficult.
There are many useful applications of the d- and f-block elements and their
compounds, notable among them being in varieties of steels, catalysts, complexes,
organic syntheses, etc.
Exercises
8.1
Write down the electronic configuration of:
(i) Cr 3+
(iii) Cu +
(v) Co 2 +
3+
4+
(ii) Pm
(iv) Ce
(vi) Lu 2+
2+
(vii) Mn 2+
(viii) Th 4+
2+
8.2 Why are Mn
+3 state?
8.3 Explain briefly how +2 state becomes more and more stable in the first half
of the first row transition elements with increasing atomic number?
8.4 To what extent do the electronic configurations decide the stability of
oxidation states in the first series of the transition elements? Illustrate
your answer with examples.
8.5 What may be the stable oxidation state of the transition element with the
following d electron configurations in the ground state of their atoms : 3d 3 ,
5
8
4
3d , 3d and 3d ?
8.6 Name the oxometal anions of the first series of the transition metals in
which the metal exhibits the oxidation state equal to its group number.
8.7 What is lanthanoid contraction? What are the consequences of lanthanoid
contraction?
8.8 What are the characteristics of the transition elements and why are they
called transition elements? Which of the d-block elements may not be
regarded as the transition elements?
8.9 In what way is the electronic configuration of the transition elements different
from that of the non transition elements?
8.10
compounds more stable than Fe
towards oxidation to their
What are the different oxidation states exhibited by the lanthanoids?
8.11 Explain giving reasons:
(i) Transition metals and many of their compounds show paramagnetic
behaviour.
(ii) The enthalpies of atomisation of the transition metals are high.
(iii) The transition metals generally form coloured compounds.
(iv) Transition metals and their many compounds act as good catalyst.
8.12 What are interstitial compounds? Why are such compounds well known for
transition metals?
8.13 How is the variability in oxidation states of transition metals different from
that of the non transition metals? Illustrate with examples.
8.14 Describe the preparation of potassium dichromate from iron chromite ore.
What is the effect of increasing pH on a solution of potassium dichromate?
8.15 Describe the oxidising action of potassium dichromate and write the ionic
equations for its reaction with:
(i) iodide
(ii) iron(II) solution and
(iii) H 2 S
Chemistry 234
2017-188.16 Describe the preparation of potassium permanganate. How does the acidified
permanganate solution react with (i) iron(II) ions (ii) SO 2 and (iii) oxalic acid?
Write the ionic equations for the reactions.
8.17 For M /M and M /M systems the E values for some metals are as follows:
2+
3
2+
Cr /Cr
-0.9V
Cr /Cr
-0.4 V
2+
3+
Mn /Mn
-1.2V
Mn /Mn 2+
+1.5 V
2+
3+
2+
Fe /Fe
-0.4V
Fe /Fe
+0.8 V
Use this data to comment upon:
(i) the stability of Fe 3+ in acid solution as compared to that of Cr 3+ or Mn 3+ and
(ii) the ease with which iron can be oxidised as compared to a similar process
for either chromium or manganese metal.
8.18 Predict which of the following will be coloured in aqueous solution? Ti , V ,
+
3+
2+
3+
2+
Cu , Sc , Mn , Fe and Co . Give reasons for each.
8.19 Compare the stability of +2 oxidation state for the elements of the first
transition series.
8.20 Compare the chemistry of actinoids with that of the lanthanoids with special
reference to:
(i) electronic configuration
(iii) oxidation state
(ii) atomic and ionic sizes and
(iv) chemical reactivity.
8.21
2+
3+
2+
V
3+
3+
How would you account for the following:
(i) Of the d 4 species, Cr 2+ is strongly reducing while manganese(III)
is strongly oxidising.
(ii) Cobalt(II) is stable in aqueous solution but in the presence of
complexing reagents it is easily oxidised.
(iii) The d 1 configuration is very unstable in ions.
8.22 What is meant by ‘disproportionation’? Give two examples of disproportionation
reaction in aqueous solution.
8.23 Which metal in the first series of transition metals exhibits +1 oxidation
state most frequently and why?
8.24 Calculate the number of unpaired electrons in the following gaseous ions: Mn ,
3+
3+
3+
Cr , V and Ti . Which one of these is the most stable in aqueous solution?
8.25 Give examples and suggest reasons for the following features of the transition
metal chemistry:
(i) The lowest oxide of transition metal is basic, the highest is
amphoteric/acidic.
(ii) A transition metal exhibits highest oxidation state in oxides
and fluorides.
(iii) The highest oxidation state is exhibited in oxoanions of a metal.
3+
8.26 Indicate the steps in the preparation of:
(i) K 2 Cr 2 O 7 from chromite ore.
(ii) KMnO 4 from pyrolusite ore.
8.27 What are alloys? Name an important alloy which contains some of the
lanthanoid metals. Mention its uses.
8.28 What are inner transition elements? Decide which of the following atomic
numbers are the atomic numbers of the inner transition elements : 29, 59,
74, 95, 102, 104.
8.29 The chemistry of the actinoid elements is not so smooth as that of the
lanthanoids. Justify this statement by giving some examples from the
oxidation state of these elements.
8.30 Which is the last element in the series of the actinoids? Write the electronic
configuration of this element. Comment on the possible oxidation state of
this element.
235 The d- and f- Block Elements
2017-183+
8.31 Use Hund’s rule to derive the electronic configuration of Ce
its magnetic moment on the basis of ‘spin-only’ formula.
8.32 Name the members of the lanthanoid series which exhibit +4 oxidation states
and those which exhibit +2 oxidation states. Try to correlate this type of
behaviour with the electronic configurations of these elements.
8.33 Compare the chemistry of the actinoids with that of lanthanoids with reference to:
(i) electronic configuration
(ii) oxidation states and
ion, and calculate
(iii) chemical reactivity.
8.34 Write the electronic configurations of the elements with the atomic numbers
61, 91, 101, and 109.
8.35 Compare the general characteristics of the first series of the transition metals
with those of the second and third series metals in the respective vertical
columns. Give special emphasis on the following points:
(i) electronic configurations
and (iv) atomic sizes.
(ii) oxidation states
(iii) ionisation enthalpies
2+
2+
8.36 Write down the number of 3d electrons in each of the following ions: Ti , V ,
3+
2+
2+
3+
2+
2+
2+
Cr , Mn , Fe , Fe , Co , Ni and Cu . Indicate how would you expect the five
3d orbitals to be occupied for these hydrated ions (octahedral).
8.37 Comment on the statement that elements of the first transition series possess
many properties different from those of heavier transition elements.
8.38 What can be inferred from the magnetic moment values of the following complex
species ?
Example
Magnetic Moment (BM)
K 4 [Mn(CN) 6 )
[Fe(H 2 O) 6 ] 2+
K 2 [MnCl 4 ]
2.2
5.3
5.9
Answers to Some Intext Questions
8.1 Silver (Z = 47) can exhibit +2 oxidation state wherein it will have
incompletely filled d-orbitals (4d), hence a transition element.
8.2 In the formation of metallic bonds, no eletrons from 3d-orbitals are involved
in case of zinc, while in all other metals of the 3d series, electrons from
the d-orbitals are always involved in the formation of metallic bonds.
8.3 Manganese (Z = 25), as its atom has the maximum number of unpaired
electrons.
8.5 Irregular variation of ionisation enthalpies is mainly attributed to varying
0
5
10
degree of stability of different 3d-configurations (e.g., d , d , d are
exceptionally stable).
8.6 Because of small size and high electronegativity oxygen or fluorine can
oxidise the metal to its highest oxidation state.
2+
2+
8.7 Cr is stronger reducing agent than Fe
4
3
2+
Reason: d → d occurs in case of Cr to Cr 3+
But d 6 → d 5 occurs in case of Fe 2+ to Fe 3+
3
5
In a medium (like water) d is more stable as compared to d (see CFSE)
8.9 Cu + in aqueous solution underoes disproportionation, i.e.,
+
2+
2Cu (aq) → Cu (aq) + Cu(s)
0
The E value for this is favourable.
8.10 The 5f electrons are more effectively shielded from nuclear charge. In other
words the 5f electrons themselves provide poor shielding from element to
element in the series.
Chemistry 236
2017-18
Unit
9
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• appreciate the postulates of
Werner’s theory of coordination
compounds;
• know the meaning of the terms:
coordination entity, central atom/
ion, ligand, coordination number,
coordination sphere, coordination
polyhedron, oxidation number,
homoleptic and heteroleptic;
• learn the rules of nomenclature
of coordination compounds;
• write the formulas and names
of mononuclear coordination
compounds;
• define different types of isomerism
in coordination compounds;
• understand the nature of bonding
in coordination compounds in
terms of the Valence Bond and
Crystal Field theories;
• learn the stability of coordination
compounds;
• appreciate the importance and
applications
of
coordination
compounds in our day to day life.
9.1 Werner’
Werner’s s
Theory of
Coordination
Compounds
Coor
dination
Coordination
Compounds
Coordination Compounds are the backbone of modern inorganic and
bio–inorganic chemistry and chemical industry.
In the previous Unit we learnt that the transition metals
form a large number of complex compounds in which
the metal atoms are bound to a number of anions or
neutral molecules. In modern terminology such
compounds are called coordination compounds. The
chemistry of coordination compounds is an important
and challenging area of modern inorganic chemistry.
New concepts of chemical bonding and molecular
structure have provided insights into the functioning of
vital components of biological systems. Chlorophyll,
haemoglobin and vitamin B 12 are coordination
compounds of magnesium, iron and cobalt respectively.
Variety of metallurgical processes, industrial catalysts
and analytical reagents involve the use of coordination
compounds. Coordination compounds also find many
applications in electroplating, textile dyeing and
medicinal chemistry.
Alfred Werner (1866-1919), a Swiss chemist was the first to formulate
his ideas about the structures of coordination compounds. He prepared
and characterised a large number of coordination compounds and
studied their physical and chemical behaviour by simple experimental
techniques. Werner proposed the concept of a primary valence and a
secondary valence for a metal ion. Binary compounds such as CrCl 3 ,
CoCl 2 or PdCl 2 have primary valence of 3, 2 and 2 respectively. In a
series of compounds of cobalt(III) chloride with ammonia, it was found
that some of the chloride ions could be precipitated as AgCl on adding
excess silver nitrate solution in cold but some remained in solution.1 mol CoCl 3 .6NH 3 (Yellow) gave 3 mol AgCl
1 mol CoCl 3 .5NH 3 (Purple) gave 2 mol AgCl
1 mol CoCl 3 .4NH 3 (Green) gave 1 mol AgCl
1 mol CoCl 3 .4NH 3 (Violet) gave 1 mol AgCl
These observations, together with the results of conductivity
measurements in solution can be explained if (i) six groups in all,
either chloride ions or ammonia molecules or both, remain bonded to
the cobalt ion during the reaction and (ii) the compounds are formulated
as shown in Table 9.1, where the atoms within the square brackets
form a single entity which does not dissociate under the reaction
conditions. Werner proposed the term secondary valence for the
number of groups bound directly to the metal ion; in each of these
examples the secondary valences are six.
Table 9.1: Formulation of Cobalt(III) Chloride-Ammonia Complexes
Colour Formula
Solution conductivity
corresponds to
Yellow [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] 3Cl
3+
–
2+
Purple [CoCl(NH 3 ) 5 ] 2Cl
Green [CoCl 2 (NH 3 ) 4 ] Cl
Violet
1:3 electrolyte
–
1:2 electrolyte
+ – 1:1 electrolyte
+ – 1:1 electrolyte
[CoCl 2 (NH 3 ) 4 ] Cl
Note that the last two compounds in Table 9.1 have identical empirical
formula, CoCl 3 .4NH 3 , but distinct properties. Such compounds are
termed as isomers. Werner in 1898, propounded his theory of
coordination compounds. The main postulates are:
1. In coordination compounds metals show two types of linkages
(valences)-primary and secondary.
2. The primary valences are normally ionisable and are satisfied by
negative ions.
3. The secondary valences are non ionisable. These are satisfied by
neutral molecules or negative ions. The secondary valence is equal to
the coordination number and is fixed for a metal.
4. The ions/groups bound by the secondary linkages to the metal have
characteristic spatial arrangements corresponding to different
coordination numbers.
In modern formulations, such spatial arrangements are called
coordination polyhedra. The species within the square bracket are
coordination entities or complexes and the ions outside the square
bracket are called counter ions.
He further postulated that octahedral, tetrahedral and square planar
geometrical shapes are more common in coordination compounds of
transition metals. Thus, [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] 3+ , [CoCl(NH 3 ) 5 ] 2+ and [CoCl 2 (NH 3 ) 4 ] +
2–
are octahedral entities, while [Ni(CO) 4 ] and [PtCl 4 ] are tetrahedral and
square planar, respectively.
Chemistry 238On the basis of the following observations made with aqueous solutions,
assign secondary valences to metals in the following compounds:
Formula
Moles of AgCl precipitated per mole of
the compounds with excess AgNO 3
(i) PdCl 2 .4NH 3 2
(ii) NiCl 2 .6H 2 O 2
(iii) PtCl 4 .2HCl 0
(iv) CoCl 3 .4NH 3 1
(v) PtCl 2 .2NH 3 0
(i) Secondary 4
(iii) Secondary 6
Example 9.1
(ii) Secondary 6
(iv) Secondary 6
Solution
(v) Secondary 4
Difference between a double salt and a complex
Both double salts as well as complexes are formed by the combination
of two or more stable compounds in stoichiometric ratio. However, they
differ in the fact that double salts such as carnallite, KCl.MgCl 2 .6H 2 O,
Mohr’s salt, FeSO 4 .(NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 .6H 2 O, potash alum, KAl(SO 4 ) 2 .12H 2 O, etc.
dissociate into simple ions completely when dissolved in water. However,
4–
complex ions such as [Fe(CN) 6 ] of K 4 [Fe(CN) 6 ] do not dissociate into
2+
–
Fe and CN ions.
Werner
was born on December 12, 1866, in Mülhouse,
a small community in the French province of Alsace.
His study of chemistry began in Karlsruhe (Germany)
and continued in Zurich (Switzerland), where in his
doctoral thesis in 1890, he explained the difference in
properties of certain nitrogen containing organic
(1866-1919)
substances on the basis of isomerism. He extended vant
Hoff’s theory of tetrahedral carbon atom and modified
it for nitrogen. Wer ner showed optical and electrical differences between
complex compounds based on physical measurements. In fact, Werner was
the first to discover optical activity in certain coordination compounds.
He, at the age of 29 years became a full professor at Technische
Hochschule in Zurich in 1895. Alfred Werner was a chemist and educationist.
His accomplishments included the development of the theory of coordination
compounds. This theory, in which Werner proposed revolutionary ideas about
how atoms and molecules are linked together, was formulated in a span of
only three years, from 1890 to 1893. The remainder of his career was spent
gathering the experimental support required to validate his new ideas. Werner
became the first Swiss chemist to win the Nobel Prize in 1913 for his work
on the linkage of atoms and the coordination theory.
239
Coordination Compounds9.2 Definitions of
Some
Important
Terms
Pertaining to
Coordination
Compounds
(a) Coordination entity
A coordination entity constitutes a central metal atom or ion bonded
to a fixed number of ions or molecules. For example, [CoCl 3 (NH 3 ) 3 ]
is a coordination entity in which the cobalt ion is surrounded by
three ammonia molecules and three chloride ions. Other examples
4–
3+
are [Ni(CO) 4 ], [PtCl 2 (NH 3 ) 2 ], [Fe(CN) 6 ] , [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] .
(b) Central atom/ion
In a coordination entity, the atom/ion to which a fixed number
of ions/groups are bound in a definite geometrical arrangement
around it, is called the central atom or ion. For example, the
central atom/ion in the coordination entities: [NiCl 2 (H 2 O) 4 ],
[CoCl(NH 3 ) 5 ] 2+ and [Fe(CN) 6 ] 3– are Ni 2+ , Co 3+ and Fe 3+ , respectively.
These central atoms/ions are also referred to as Lewis acids.
(c) Ligands
The ions or molecules bound to the central atom/ion in the
coordination entity are called ligands. These may be simple ions
–
such as Cl , small molecules such as H 2 O or NH 3 , larger molecules
such as H 2 NCH 2 CH 2 NH 2 or N(CH 2 CH 2 NH 2 ) 3 or even macromolecules,
such as proteins.
When a ligand is bound to a metal ion through a single donor
–
atom, as with Cl , H 2 O or NH 3 , the ligand is said to be unidentate.
When a ligand can bind through two donor atoms as in
2–
H 2 NCH 2 CH 2 NH 2 (ethane-1,2-diamine) or C 2 O 4 (oxalate), the
ligand is said to be didentate and when several donor atoms are
present in a single ligand as in N(CH 2 CH 2 NH 2 ) 3 , the ligand is said
4–
to be polydentate. Ethylenediaminetetraacetate ion (EDTA ) is
an important hexadentate ligand. It can bind through two
nitrogen and four oxygen atoms to a central metal ion.
When a di- or polydentate ligand uses its two or more donor
atoms to bind a single metal ion, it is said to be a chelate ligand.
The number of such ligating groups is called the denticity of the
ligand. Such complexes, called chelate complexes tend to be more
stable than similar complexes containing unidentate ligands (for
reasons see Section 9.8). Ligand which can
ligate through two different atoms is called
ambidentate ligand. Examples of such
–
–
–
ligands are the NO 2 and SCN ions. NO 2 ion
can coordinate either through nitrogen or
through oxygen to a central metal atom/ion.
–
Similarly, SCN ion can coordinate through the
sulphur or nitrogen atom.
(d) Coordination number
The coordination number (CN) of a metal ion in a complex can be
defined as the number of ligand donor atoms to which the metal is
2–
directly bonded. For example, in the complex ions, [PtCl 6 ] and
2+
[Ni(NH 3 ) 4 ] , the coordination number of Pt and Ni are 6 and 4
3–
respectively. Similarly, in the complex ions, [Fe(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ] and
3+
[Co(en) 3 ] , the coordination number of both, Fe and Co, is 6 because
2–
C 2 O 4 and en (ethane-1,2-diamine) are didentate ligands.
Chemistry 240It is important to note here that coordination number of the central
atom/ion is determined only by the number of sigma bonds formed by
the ligand with the central atom/ion. Pi bonds, if formed between the
ligand and the central atom/ion, are not counted for this purpose.
(e) Coordination sphere
The central atom/ion and the ligands attached to it are enclosed in
square bracket and is collectively termed as the coordination
sphere. The ionisable groups are written outside the bracket and
are called counter ions. For example, in the complex K 4 [Fe(CN) 6 ],
4–
+
the coordination sphere is [Fe(CN) 6 ] and the counter ion is K .
(f)
Coordination polyhedron
The spatial arrangement of the ligand atoms which are directly
attached to the central atom/ion defines a coordination
polyhedron about the central atom. The most common
coordination polyhedra are octahedral, square planar and
3+
tetrahedral. For example, [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] is octahedral, [Ni(CO) 4 ] is
2–
tetrahedral and [PtCl 4 ] is square planar. Fig. 9.1 shows the
shapes of different coordination polyhedra.
Fig. 9.1: Shapes of different coordination polyhedra. M represents
the central atom/ion and L, a unidentate ligand.
(g) Oxidation number of central atom
The oxidation number of the central atom in a complex is defined
as the charge it would carry if all the ligands are removed along
with the electron pairs that are shared with the central atom. The
oxidation number is represented by a Roman numeral in parenthesis
following the name of the coordination entity. For example, oxidation
3–
number of copper in [Cu(CN) 4 ] is +1 and it is written as Cu(I).
(h) Homoleptic and heteroleptic complexes
Complexes in which a metal is bound to only one kind of donor
3+
groups, e.g., [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] , are known as homoleptic. Complexes in
which a metal is bound to more than one kind of donor groups,
+
e.g., [Co(NH 3 ) 4 Cl 2 ] , are known as heteroleptic.
9.3 Nomenclature
of
Coordination
Compounds
Nomenclature is important in Coordination Chemistry because of the
need to have an unambiguous method of describing formulas and
writing systematic names, particularly when dealing with isomers. The
formulas and names adopted for coordination entities are based on the
recommendations of the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC).
241
Coordination Compounds9.3.1 Formulas of
Mononuclear
Coordination
Entities
Note: The 2004 IUPAC
draft recommends that
ligands will be sorted
alphabetically,
irrespective of charge.
9.3.2 Naming of
Mononuclear
Coordination
Compounds
Note: The 2004 IUPAC
draft recommends that
anionic ligands will end
with–ido so that chloro
would become chlorido,
etc.
Chemistry 242
The formula of a compound is a shorthand tool used to provide basic
information about the constitution of the compound in a concise and
convenient manner. Mononuclear coordination entities contain a single
central metal atom. The following rules are applied while writing the formulas:
(i) The central atom is listed first.
(ii) The ligands are then listed in alphabetical order. The placement of
a ligand in the list does not depend on its charge.
(iii) Polydentate ligands are also listed alphabetically. In case of
abbreviated ligand, the first letter of the abbreviation is used to
determine the position of the ligand in the alphabetical order.
(iv) The formula for the entire coordination entity, whether charged or
not, is enclosed in square brackets. When ligands are polyatomic,
their formulas are enclosed in parentheses. Ligand abbreviations
are also enclosed in parentheses.
(v) There should be no space between the ligands and the metal
within a coordination sphere.
(vi) When the formula of a charged coordination entity is to be written
without that of the counter ion, the charge is indicated outside the
square brackets as a right superscript with the number before the
3–
3+
sign. For example, [Co(CN) 6 ] , [Cr(H 2 O) 6 ] , etc.
(vii) The charge of the cation(s) is balanced by the charge of the anion(s).
The names of coordination compounds are derived by following the
principles of additive nomenclature. Thus, the groups that surround the
central atom must be identified in the name. They are listed as prefixes
to the name of the central atom along with any appropriate multipliers.
The following rules are used when naming coordination compounds:
(i) The cation is named first in both positively and negatively charged
coordination entities.
(ii) The ligands are named in an alphabetical order before the name of the
central atom/ion. (This procedure is reversed from writing formula).
(iii) Names of the anionic ligands end in –o, those of neutral and cationic
ligands are the same except aqua for H 2 O, ammine for NH 3 , carbonyl
for CO and nitrosyl for NO. These are placed within enclosing marks
( ) when written in the formula of coordination entity.
(iv) Prefixes mono, di, tri, etc., are used to indicate the number of the
individual ligands in the coordination entity. When the names of
the ligands include a numerical prefix, then the terms, bis, tris,
tetrakis are used, the ligand to which they refer being placed in
parentheses. For example, [NiCl 2 (PPh 3 ) 2 ] is named as
dichloridobis(triphenylphosphine)nickel(II).
(v) Oxidation state of the metal in cation, anion or neutral coordination
entity is indicated by Roman numeral in parenthesis.
(vi) If the complex ion is a cation, the metal is named same as the
element. For example, Co in a complex cation is called cobalt and
Pt is called platinum. If the complex ion is an anion, the name of
the metal ends with the suffix – ate. For example, Co in a complex
2 −
anion,   Co ( SCN ) 4   is called cobaltate. For some metals, the Latin
names are used in the complex anions, e.g., ferrate for Fe.(vii) The neutral complex molecule is named similar to that of the
complex cation.
The following examples illustrate the nomenclature for coordination
compounds.
1. [Cr(NH 3 ) 3 (H 2 O) 3 ]Cl 3 is named as:
triamminetriaquachromium(III) chloride
Explanation: The complex ion is inside the square bracket, which is
a cation. The amine ligands are named before the aqua ligands
according to alphabetical order. Since there are three chloride ions in
the compound, the charge on the complex ion must be +3 (since the
compound is electrically neutral). From the charge on the complex
ion and the charge on the ligands, we can calculate the oxidation
number of the metal. In this example, all the ligands are neutral
molecules. Therefore, the oxidation number of chromium must be
the same as the charge of the complex ion, +3.
2. [Co(H 2 NCH 2 CH 2 NH 2 ) 3 ] 2 (SO 4 ) 3 is named as:
tris(ethane-1,2–diamine)cobalt(III) sulphate
Explanation: The sulphate is the counter anion in this molecule.
Since it takes 3 sulphates to bond with two complex cations, the
charge on each complex cation must be +3. Further, ethane-1,2–
diamine is a neutral molecule, so the oxidation number of cobalt
in the complex ion must be +3. Remember that you never have to
indicate the number of cations and anions in the name of an
ionic compound.
Notice how the name of
the metal differs in
cation and anion even
though they contain the
same metal ions.
3. [Ag(NH 3 ) 2 ][Ag(CN) 2 ] is named as:
diamminesilver(I) dicyanidoargentate(I)
Example 9.2 Write the formulas for the following coordination compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Tetraammineaquachloridocobalt(III) chloride
Potassium tetrahydroxidozincate(II)
Potassium trioxalatoaluminate(III)
Dichloridobis(ethane-1,2-diamine)cobalt(III)
Tetracarbonylnickel(0)
Solution (a) [Co(NH 3 ) 4 (H 2 O)Cl]Cl 2
(d) [CoCl 2 (en) 2 ] +
(b) K 2 [Zn(OH) 4 ]
(e) [Ni(CO) 4 ]
(c) K 3 [Al(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]
Example 9.3 Write the IUPAC names of the following coordination compounds:
(a) [Pt(NH 3 ) 2 Cl(NO 2 )]
(d) [Co(NH 3 ) 5 (CO 3 )]Cl
(b) K 3 [Cr(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]
(e) Hg[Co(SCN) 4 ]
(c) [CoCl 2 (en) 2 ]Cl
Solution (a) Diamminechloridonitrito-N-platinum(II)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Potassium trioxalatochromate(III)
Dichloridobis(ethane-1,2-diamine)cobalt(III) chloride
Pentaamminecarbonatocobalt(III) chloride
Mercury (I) tetrathiocyanatocobaltate(III)
243
Coordination CompoundsIntext Questions
9.1 Write the formulas for the following coordination compounds:
(i) Tetraamminediaquacobalt(III) chloride
(ii) Potassium tetracyanidonickelate(II)
(iii) Tris(ethane–1,2–diamine) chromium(III) chloride
(iv) Amminebromidochloridonitrito-N-platinate(II)
(v) Dichloridobis(ethane–1,2–diamine)platinum(IV) nitrate
(vi) Iron(III) hexacyanidoferrate(II)
9.2 Write the IUPAC names of the following coordination compounds:
(i) [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ]Cl 3
(ii) [Co(NH 3 ) 5 Cl]Cl 2
(iii) K 3 [Fe(CN) 6 ]
(iv) K 3 [Fe(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]
(v) K 2 [PdCl 4 ]
(vi) [Pt(NH 3 ) 2 Cl(NH 2 CH 3 )]Cl
9 . 4 Isomerism in
Coordination
Compounds
Isomers are two or more compounds that have the same chemical
formula but a different arrangement of atoms. Because of the different
arrangement of atoms, they differ in one or more physical or chemical
properties. Two principal types of isomerism are known among
coordination compounds. Each of which can be further subdivided.
(a) Stereoisomerism
(i) Geometrical isomerism
(ii) Optical isomerism
(b) Structural isomerism
(i) Linkage isomerism
(ii) Coordination isomerism
(iii) Ionisation isomerism
(iv) Solvate isomerism
Stereoisomers have the same chemical formula and chemical
bonds but they have different spatial arrangement. Structural isomers
have different bonds. A detailed account of these isomers are
given below.
9.4.1 Geometric Isomerism
This type of isomerism arises in heteroleptic
complexes due to different possible geometric
arrangements of the ligands. Important examples of
this behaviour are found with coordination numbers
4 and 6. In a square planar complex of formula
[MX 2 L 2 ] (X and L are unidentate), the two ligands X
may be arranged adjacent to each other in a cis
isomer, or opposite to each other in a trans isomer
as depicted in Fig. 9.2.
Fig. 9.2: Geometrical isomers (cis and
trans) of Pt [NH 3 ) 2 Cl 2 ]
+
Cl
N H 3
N H 3
+
Cl
Cl N H 3
N H 3 N H 3
N H 3
Co
Co
N H 3
cis
N H 3
Cl
trans
Fig. 9.3: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans)
of [Co(NH 3 ) 4 Cl 2 ] +
Chemistry 244
Other square planar complex of the type
MABXL (where A, B, X, L are unidentates)
shows three isomers-two cis and one trans.
You may attempt to draw these structures.
Such isomerism is not possible for a tetrahedral
geometry but similar behaviour is possible in
octahedral complexes of formula [MX 2 L 4 ] in
which the two ligands X may be oriented cis
or trans to each other (Fig. 9.3).Fig. 9.4: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans)
of [CoCl 2 (en) 2 ]
Fig. 9.5
The facial (fac) and
meridional (mer)
isomers of
[Co(NH 3 ) 3 (NO 2 ) 3 ]
This type of isomerism also
arises when didentate ligands
L – L [e.g., NH 2 CH 2 CH 2 NH 2 (en)]
are present in complexes of formula
[MX 2 (L – L) 2 ] (Fig. 9.4).
Another type of geometrical
isomerism occurs in octahedral
coordination entities of the type
[Ma 3 b 3 ] like [Co(NH 3 ) 3 (NO 2 ) 3 ]. If
three donor atoms of the same
ligands occupy adjacent positions
at the corners of an octahedral
face, we have the facial (fac)
isomer. When the positions are
around the meridian of the
octahedron, we get the meridional
(mer) isomer (Fig. 9.5).
Why is geometrical isomerism not possible in tetrahedral complexes
having two different types of unidentate ligands coordinated with
the central metal ion ? Example 9.4
Tetrahedral complexes do not show geometrical isomerism because
the relative positions of the unidentate ligands attached to the central
metal atom are the same with respect to each other. Solution
9.4.2
Optical Isomerism
Fig.9.6: Optical isomers (d and l) of [Co(en) 3 ] 3+
Optical isomers are mirror images that
cannot be superimposed on one
another. These are called as
enantiomers. The molecules or ions
that cannot be superimposed are
called chiral. The two forms are called
dextro (d) and laevo (l) depending
upon the direction they rotate the
plane of polarised light in a
polarimeter (d rotates to the right, l to
the left). Optical isomerism is common
in octahedral complexes involving
didentate ligands (Fig. 9.6).
In a coordination
entity of the type
2+
[PtCl 2 (en) 2 ] , only the
cis-isomer shows optical
activity (Fig. 9.7).
Fig.9.7
Optical isomers (d
and l) of cis-
[PtCl 2 (en) 2 ] 2+
245
Coordination CompoundsExample 9.5 Draw structures of geometrical isomers of [Fe(NH 3 ) 2 (CN) 4 ] –
Solution
Example 9.6 Out of the following two coordination entities which is chiral
(optically active)?
3–
(a) cis-[CrCl 2 (ox) 2 ]
3–
(b) trans-[CrCl 2 (ox) 2 ]
Solution The two entities are represented as
3-
Out of the two, (a) cis - [CrCl 2 (ox) 2 ] is chiral (optically active).
9.4.3 Linkage
Isomerism Linkage isomerism arises in a coordination compound containing
ambidentate ligand. A simple example is provided by complexes
–
containing the thiocyanate ligand, NCS , which may bind through the
nitrogen to give M–NCS or through sulphur to give M–SCN. Jørgensen
discovered such behaviour in the complex [Co(NH 3 ) 5 (NO 2 )]Cl 2 , which is
obtained as the red form, in which the nitrite ligand is bound through
oxygen (–ONO), and as the yellow form, in which the nitrite ligand is
bound through nitrogen (–NO 2 ).
9.4.4 Coordination
Isomerism This type of isomerism arises from the interchange of ligands between
cationic and anionic entities of different metal ions present in a complex.
An example is provided by [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ][Cr(CN) 6 ], in which the NH 3 ligands
3+
–
3+
are bound to Co and the CN ligands to Cr . In its coordination
3+
isomer [Cr(NH 3 ) 6 ][Co(CN) 6 ], the NH 3 ligands are bound to Cr and the
–
3+
CN ligands to Co .
9.4.5 Ionisation
Isomerism This form of isomerism arises when the counter ion in a complex salt
is itself a potential ligand and can displace a ligand which can then
become the counter ion. An example is provided by the ionisation
isomers [Co(NH 3 ) 5 (SO 4 )]Br and [Co(NH 3 ) 5 Br]SO 4 .
Chemistry 2469.4.6 Solvate
Isomerism
This form of isomerism is known as ‘hydrate isomerism’ in case where
water is involved as a solvent. This is similar to ionisation isomerism.
Solvate isomers differ by whether or not a solvent molecule is directly
bonded to the metal ion or merely present as free solvent molecules
in the crystal lattice. An example is provided by the aqua
complex [Cr(H 2 O) 6 ]Cl 3 (violet) and its solvate isomer [Cr(H 2 O) 5 Cl]Cl 2 .H 2 O
(grey-green).
Intext Questions
9.3 Indicate the types of isomerism exhibited by the following complexes and
draw the structures for these isomers:
(i) K[Cr(H 2 O) 2 (C 2 O 4 ) 2
(ii) [Co(en) 3 ]Cl 3
(iii) [Co(NH 3 ) 5 (NO 2 )](NO 3 ) 2
(iv) [Pt(NH 3 )(H 2 O)Cl 2 ]
9.4 Give evidence that [Co(NH 3 ) 5 Cl]SO 4 and [Co(NH 3 ) 5 (SO 4 )]Cl are ionisation
isomers.
9.5 Bonding in
Coordination
Compounds Werner was the first to describe the bonding features in coordination
compounds. But his theory could not answer basic questions like:
(i) Why only certain elements possess the remarkable property of
forming coordination compounds?
(ii) Why the bonds in coordination compounds have directional
properties?
(iii) Why coordination compounds have characteristic magnetic and
optical properties?
Many approaches have been put forth to explain the nature of
bonding in coordination compounds viz. Valence Bond Theory (VBT),
Crystal Field Theory (CFT), Ligand Field Theory (LFT) and Molecular
Orbital Theory (MOT). We shall focus our attention on elementary
treatment of the application of VBT and CFT to coordination compounds.
9.5.1 Valence
Bond
Theory According to this theory, the metal atom or ion under the influence of
ligands can use its (n-1)d, ns, np or ns, np, nd orbitals for hybridisation
to yield a set of equivalent orbitals of definite geometry such as octahedral,
tetrahedral, square planar and so on (Table 9.2). These hybridised orbitals
are allowed to overlap with ligand orbitals that can donate electron pairs
for bonding. This is illustrated by the following examples.
Table 9.2: Number of Orbitals and Types of Hybridisations
Coordination
number
4
Type of
hybridisation
Distribution of hybrid
orbitals in space
3
Tetrahedral
sp
2
4 dsp 5 sp d Trigonal bipyramidal
6 sp d 3 2 Octahedral
3 Octahedral
6
Square planar
3
2
d sp
247
Coordination CompoundsIt is usually possible to predict the geometry of a complex from
the knowledge of its
magnetic behaviour on
the basis of the valence
bond theory.
In the diamagnetic
octahedral
complex,
3+
[Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] , the cobalt ion
is in +3 oxidation state
and has the electronic
6
configuration 3d . The
hybridisation scheme is as
shown in diagram.
Six pairs of electrons, one from each NH 3 molecule, occupy the six
hybrid orbitals. Thus, the complex has octahedral geometry and is
diamagnetic because of the absence of unpaired electron. In the formation
of this complex, since the inner d orbital (3d) is used in hybridisation,
3+
the complex, [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] is called an inner orbital or low spin or spin
3–
paired complex. The paramagnetic octahedral complex, [CoF 6 ] uses
3 2
outer orbital (4d ) in hybridisation (sp d ). It is thus called outer orbital
or high spin or spin free complex. Thus:
Orbitals of Co 3+ ion
3d
3
4s
4p
4d
2
sp d hybridised
3+
orbitals of Co
3d
sp 3 d 3 hybrid
3–
[CoF 6 ]
(outer orbital or
high spin complex)
3d
Six pairs of electrons
–
from six F ions
In tetrahedral complexes
one s and three p orbitals
are hybridised to form four
equivalent orbitals oriented
tetrahedrally. This is ill-
2-
ustrated below for [NiCl 4 ] .
Here nickel is in +2
oxidation state and the ion
has
the
electronic
8
configuration 3d . The
hybridisation scheme is as
shown in diagram.
–
Each Cl ion donates a pair of electrons. The compound is
paramagnetic since it contains two unpaired electrons. Similarly,
[Ni(CO) 4 ] has tetrahedral geometry but is diamagnetic since nickel is in
zero oxidation state and contains no unpaired electron.
Chemistry 2482
In the square planar complexes, the hybridisation involved is dsp .
2–
An example is [Ni(CN) 4 ] . Here nickel is in +2 oxidation state and has
8
the electronic configuration 3d . The hybridisation scheme is as shown
in diagram:
Orbitals of Ni 2+ ion
4s
3d
4p
2
dsp hybridised
2+
orbitals of Ni
dsp hydrid 4p
Four pairs of electrons
–
from 4 CN groups 4p
2
3d
[Ni(CN) 4 ] 2–
(low spin complex)
3d
Each of the hybridised orbitals receives a pair of electrons from a
cyanide ion. The compound is diamagnetic as evident from the absence
of unpaired electron.
It is important to note that the hybrid orbitals do not actually exist.
In fact, hybridisation is a mathematical manipulation of wave equation
for the atomic orbitals involved.
9.5.2 Magnetic
Properties
of
Coordination
Compounds
The magnetic moment of coordination compounds can be measured
by the magnetic susceptibility experiments. The results can be used to
obtain information about the structures adopted by metal complexes.
A critical study of the magnetic data of coordination compounds of
metals of the first transition series reveals some complications. For
3+
1
3+
metal ions with upto three electrons in the d orbitals, like Ti (d ); V
2
3+
3
(d ); Cr (d ); two vacant d orbitals are available for octahedral
hybridisation with 4s and 4p orbitals. The magnetic behaviour of these
free ions and their coordination entities is similar. When more than
three 3d electrons are present, the required pair of 3d orbitals for
octahedral hybridisation is not directly available (as a consequence of
4
2+
3+
5
2+
3+
6
2+
3+
Hund’s rule). Thus, for d (Cr , Mn ), d (Mn , Fe ), d (Fe , Co )
cases, a vacant pair of d orbitals results only by pairing of 3d electrons
which leaves two, one and zero unpaired electrons, respectively.
The magnetic data agree with maximum spin pairing in many cases,
6
especially with coordination compounds containing d ions. However,
4
5
3–
with species containing d and d ions there are complications. [Mn(CN) 6 ]
3–
has magnetic moment of two unpaired electrons while [MnCl 6 ] has a
3–
paramagnetic moment of four unpaired electrons. [Fe(CN) 6 ] has magnetic
3–
moment of a single unpaired electron while [FeF 6 ] has a paramagnetic
3–
moment of five unpaired electrons. [CoF 6 ] is paramagnetic with four
3–
unpaired electrons while [Co(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ] is diamagnetic. This apparent
anomaly is explained by valence bond theory in terms of formation of
3–
3–
inner orbital and outer orbital coordination entities. [Mn(CN) 6 ] , [Fe(CN) 6 ]
3–
2
3
and [Co(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ] are inner orbital complexes involving d sp hybridisation,
the former two complexes are paramagnetic and the latter diamagnetic.
3–
3–
3–
On the other hand, [MnCl 6 ] , [FeF 6 ] and [CoF 6- ] are outer orbital
3 2
complexes involving sp d hybridisation and are paramagnetic
corresponding to four, five and four unpaired electrons.
249
Coordination CompoundsExample 9.7
The spin only magnetic moment of [MnBr 4 ]
geometry of the complex ion ?
2–
is 5.9 BM. Predict the
Solution Since the coordination number of Mn 2+ ion in the complex ion is 4, it
3
2
will be either tetrahedral (sp hybridisation) or square planar (dsp
hybridisation). But the fact that the magnetic moment of the complex
ion is 5.9 BM, it should be tetrahedral in shape rather than square
planar because of the presence of five unpaired electrons in the d orbitals.
9.5.3 Limitations
of Valence
Bond
Theory While the VB theory, to a larger extent, explains the formation, structures
and magnetic behaviour of coordination compounds, it suffers from
the following shortcomings:
(i) It involves a number of assumptions.
(ii) It does not give quantitative interpretation of magnetic data.
(iii) It does not explain the colour exhibited by coordination compounds.
(iv) It does not give a quantitative interpretation of the thermodynamic
or kinetic stabilities of coordination compounds.
(v) It does not make exact predictions regarding the tetrahedral and
square planar structures of 4-coordinate complexes.
(vi) It does not distinguish between weak and strong ligands.
9.5.4 Crystal Field
Theory The crystal field theory (CFT) is an electrostatic model which considers
the metal-ligand bond to be ionic arising purely from electrostatic
interactions between the metal ion and the ligand. Ligands are treated
as point charges in case of anions or dipoles in case of neutral molecules.
The five d orbitals in an isolated gaseous metal atom/ion have same
energy, i.e., they are degenerate. This degeneracy is maintained if a
spherically symmetrical field of negative charges surrounds the metal
atom/ion. However, when this negative field is due to ligands (either
anions or the negative ends of dipolar molecules like NH 3 and H 2 O) in
a complex, it becomes asymmetrical and the degeneracy of the d orbitals
is lifted. It results in splitting of the d orbitals. The pattern of splitting
depends upon the nature of the crystal field. Let us explain this splitting
in different crystal fields.
(a) Crystal field splitting in octahedral coordination entities
In an octahedral coordination entity with six ligands surrounding
the metal atom/ion, there will be repulsion between the electrons in
metal d orbitals and the electrons (or negative charges) of the ligands.
Such a repulsion is more when the metal d orbital is directed towards
the ligand than when it is away from the ligand. Thus, the d x 2 − y 2
and d z 2 orbitals which point towards the axes along the direction of
the ligand will experience more repulsion and will be raised in
energy; and the d xy , d yz and d xz orbitals which are directed between
the axes will be lowered in energy relative to the average energy in
the spherical crystal field. Thus, the degeneracy of the d orbitals
has been removed due to ligand electron-metal electron repulsions
in the octahedral complex to yield three orbitals of lower energy, t 2g
set and two orbitals of higher energy, e g set. This splitting of the
Chemistry 250degenerate levels due to the
presence of ligands in a
definite geometry is termed as
crystal field splitting and the
energy separation is denoted
by ∆ o (the subscript o is for
octahedral) (Fig.9.8). Thus, the
energy of the two e g orbitals
will increase by (3/5) ∆ o and
that of the three t 2g will
decrease by (2/5)∆ o .
The crystal field splitting,
∆ o , depends upon the field
produced by the ligand and
charge on the metal ion. Some
ligands are able to produce
strong fields in which case, the
splitting will be large whereas
others produce weak fields
Fig.9.8: d orbital splitting in an octahedral crystal field
and consequently result in
small splitting of d orbitals. In
general, ligands can be arranged in a series in the order of increasing
field strength as given below:
–
–
–
–
2–
–
–
2–
–
I < Br < SCN < Cl < S < F < OH < C 2 O 4 < H 2 O < NCS
4–
–
< edta < NH 3 < en < CN < CO
Such a series is termed as spectrochemical series. It is an
experimentally determined series based on the absorption of light
by complexes with different ligands. Let us assign electrons in the d
orbitals of metal ion in octahedral coordination entities. Obviously,
the single d electron occupies one of the lower energy t 2g orbitals. In
2
3
d and d coordination entities, the d electrons occupy the t 2g orbitals
singly in accordance with the Hund’s rule. For d 4 ions, two possible
patterns of electron distribution arise: (i) the fourth electron could
either enter the t 2g level and pair with an existing electron, or (ii) it
could avoid paying the price of the pairing energy by occupying the
e g level. Which of these possibilities occurs, depends on the relative
magnitude of the crystal field splitting, ∆ o and the pairing energy, P
(P represents the energy required for electron pairing in a single
orbital). The two options are:
(i) If ∆ o < P, the fourth electron enters one of the e g orbitals giving the
3 1
configuration t 2g e g . Ligands for which ∆ o < P are known as weak
field ligands and form high spin complexes.
(ii) If ∆ o > P, it becomes more energetically favourable for the fourth
4
0
electron to occupy a t 2g orbital with configuration t 2g e g . Ligands
which produce this effect are known as strong field ligands and
form low spin complexes.
4
7
Calculations show that d to d coordination entities are more
stable for strong field as compared to weak field cases.
251
Coordination Compounds(b) Crystal field splitting in tetrahedral coordination entities
Fig.9.9: d orbital splitting in a tetrahedral crystal field.
9.5.5 Colour in
Coordination
Compounds
In tetrahedral coordination
entity formation, the d orbital
splitting (Fig. 9.9) is inverted
and is smaller as compared to
the octahedral field splitting.
For the same metal, the same
ligands and metal-ligand
distances, it can be shown that
∆ t = (4/9) ∆ 0 . Consequently, the
orbital splitting energies are
not sufficiently large for forcing
pairing and, therefore, low spin
configurations are rarely
observed.
In the previous Unit, we learnt that one of the most distinctive
properties of transition metal complexes is their wide range of colours.
This means that some of the visible spectrum is being removed from
white light as it passes through the sample, so the light that emerges
is no longer white. The colour of the complex is complementary to
that which is absorbed. The complementary colour is the colour
generated from the wavelength left over; if green light is absorbed by
the complex, it appears red. Table 9.3 gives the relationship of the
different wavelength absorbed and the colour observed.
Table 9.3: Relationship between the Wavelength of Light absorbed and the
Colour observed in some Coordination Entities
Coordinaton
entity
[CoCl(NH 3 ) 5 ]
2+
3+
[Co(NH 3 ) 5 (H 2 O)]
[Co(NH 3 ) 6 ]
[Co(CN) 6 ]
3+
3–
[Cu(H 2 O) 4 ]
2+
3+
[Ti(H 2 O) 6 ]
Wavelength of light
absorbed (nm)
Colour of light
absorbed
Colour of coordination
entity
535 Yellow Violet
500 Blue Green Red
475 Blue
310
Ultraviolet
Yellow Orange
Not in visible
region
Pale Yellow
600 Red Blue
498 Blue Green Violet
The colour in the coordination compounds can be readily explained
in terms of the crystal field theory. Consider, for example, the complex
[Ti(H 2 O) 6 ] 3+ , which is violet in colour. This is an octahedral complex
3+
1
where the single electron (Ti is a 3d system) in the metal d orbital is
in the t 2g level in the ground state of the complex. The next higher state
available for the electron is the empty e g level. If light corresponding to
the energy of blue-green region is absorbed by the complex, it would
1
0
0
1
excite the electron from t 2g level to the e g level (t 2g e g → t 2g e g ).
Consequently, the complex appears violet in colour (Fig. 9.10). The
crystal field theory attributes the colour of the coordination compounds
to d-d transition of the electron.
Chemistry 252It is important to note that
in the absence of ligand,
crystal field splitting does
not occur and hence the
substance is colourless. For
example, removal of water
from [Ti(H 2 O) 6 ]Cl 3 on heating
renders
it
colourless.
Similarly, anhydrous CuSO 4
is white, but CuSO 4 .5H 2 O is
blue in colour. The influence
Fig.9.10: Transition of an electron in [Ti(H 2 O) 6 ] 3+
of the ligand on the colour
2+
of a complex may be illustrated by considering the [Ni(H 2 O) 6 ] complex,
which forms when nickel(II) chloride is dissolved in water. If the
didentate ligand, ethane-1,2-diamine(en) is progressively added in the
molar ratios en:Ni, 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, the following series of reactions and
their associated colour changes occur:
2+
[Ni(H 2 O) 6 ]
green
(aq)
2+
+ en (aq) = [Ni(H 2 O) 4 (en)] (aq)
pale blue
2+
+ 2H 2 O
2+
[Ni(H 2 O) 4 (en)] (aq) + en (aq) = [Ni(H 2 O) 2 (en) 2 ] (aq) + 2H 2 O
blue/purple
2+
2+
[Ni(H 2 O) 2 (en) 2 ] (aq) + en (aq) = [Ni(en) 3 ] (aq)
violet
This sequence is shown in Fig. 9.11.
Fig.9.11
Aqueous solutions of
complexes of
nickel(II) with an
increasing number of
ethane-1,
2-diamine ligands.
+ 2H 2 O
[Ni(H 2 O) 6 ] 2+ (aq)
[Ni(en) 3 ] 2+ (aq)
[Ni(H 2 O) 4 en ] 2+ (aq) [Ni(H 2 O) 4 en 2 ] 2+ (aq)
Colour of Some Gem Stones
The colours produced by electronic transitions within the d orbitals of a
transition metal ion occur frequently in everyday life. Ruby [Fig.9.12(a)] is
3+
3
aluminium oxide (Al 2 O 3 ) containing about 0.5-1% Cr ions (d ), which are
3+
randomly distributed in positions normally occupied by Al . We may view
these chromium(III) species as octahedral chromium(III) complexes incorporated
into the alumina lattice; d–d transitions at these centres give rise to the colour.
253
Coordination Compounds3+
In emerald [Fig.9.12(b)], Cr
ions occupy octahedral sites
in
the
mineral
beryl
(Be 3 Al 2 Si 6 O 18 ). The absorption
bands seen in the ruby shift
to longer wavelength, namely
yellow-red and blue, causing
emerald to transmit light in
the green region.
9.5.6 Limitations
of Crystal
Field
Theory
(a)
(b)
Fig.9.12: (a) Ruby: this gemstone was found in
marble from Mogok, Myanmar; (b) Emerald:
this gemstone was found in Muzo,
Columbia.
The crystal field model is successful in explaining the formation,
structures, colour and magnetic properties of coordination compounds
to a large extent. However, from the assumptions that the ligands are
point charges, it follows that anionic ligands should exert the greatest
splitting effect. The anionic ligands actually are found at the low end
of the spectrochemical series. Further, it does not take into account
the covalent character of bonding between the ligand and the central
atom. These are some of the weaknesses of CFT, which are explained
by ligand field theory (LFT) and molecular orbital theory which are
beyond the scope of the present study.
Intext Questions
2–
9.5 Explain on the basis of valence bond theory that [Ni(CN) 4 ] ion with square
2–
planar structure is diamagnetic and the [NiCl 4 ] ion with tetrahedral
geometry is paramagnetic.
2–
9.6 [NiCl 4 ] is paramagnetic while [Ni(CO) 4 ] is diamagnetic though both are
tetrahedral. Why?
3+
3–
9.7 [Fe(H 2 O) 6 ] is strongly paramagnetic whereas [Fe(CN) 6 ] is weakly
paramagnetic. Explain.
3+
2+
9.8 Explain [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] is an inner orbital complex whereas [Ni(NH 3 ) 6 ] is an
outer orbital complex.
2–
9.9 Predict the number of unpaired electrons in the square planar [Pt(CN) 4 ] ion.
9.10 The hexaquo manganese(II) ion contains five unpaired electrons, while the
hexacyanoion contains only one unpaired electron. Explain using Crystal
Field Theory.
9.6 Bonding in
Metal
Carbonyls
Chemistry 254
The homoleptic carbonyls (compounds containing carbonyl ligands
only) are formed by most of the transition metals. These carbonyls
have simple, well defined structures. Tetracarbonylnickel(0) is
tetrahedral, pentacarbonyliron(0) is trigonalbipyramidal while
hexacarbonyl chromium(0) is octahedral.
Decacarbonyldimanganese(0) is made up of two square pyramidal
Mn(CO) 5 units joined by a Mn – Mn bond. Octacarbonyldicobalt(0)
has a Co – Co bond bridged by two CO groups (Fig.9.13).CO
OC
Ni
Fe
OC
CO
CO
Fe(CO) 5
Trigonal bipyramidal
CO
CO
Cr
CO
CO
CO
Cr(CO) 6 Octahedral
Fig. 9.14: Example of synergic bonding
interactions in a carbonyl complex.
9.7 Stability of
Coordination
Compounds
O
C
CO
Ni(CO) 4
Tetrahedral
Fig. 9.13
Structures of some
representative
homoleptic metal
carbonyls.
CO
OC
CO
CO
CO
Mn
OC
CO
CO
CO
CO
Mn
CO
CO
OC
OC
OC
Co
CO
Co
C
O
CO
CO
[Co 2 (CO) 8 ]
CO
CO
[Mn 2 (CO) 10 ]
The metal-carbon bond in metal carbonyls
possess both σ and π character. The M–C σ bond
is formed by the donation of lone pair of electrons
on the carbonyl carbon into a vacant orbital of
the metal. The M–C π bond is formed by the
donation of a pair of electrons from a filled d orbital
of metal into the vacant antibonding π* orbital of
carbon monoxide. The metal to ligand bonding
creates a synergic effect which strengthens the
bond between CO and the metal (Fig.9.14).
The stability of a complex in solution refers to the degree of association
between the two species involved in the state of equilibrium. The
magnitude of the (stability or formation) equilibrium constant for the
association, quantitatively expresses the stability. Thus, if we have a
reaction of the type:
M + 4L  ML 4
then the larger the stability constant, the higher the proportion of ML 4
that exists in solution. Free metal ions rarely exist in the solution so
that M will usually be surrounded by solvent molecules which will
compete with the ligand molecules, L, and be successively replaced by
them. For simplicity, we generally ignore these solvent molecules and
write four stability constants as follows:
L  ML
M
+
K 1 = [ML]/[M][L]
L  ML 2
ML
+
K 2 = [ML 2 ]/[ML][L]
L  ML 3
ML 2 +
K 3 = [ML 3 ]/[ML 2 ][L]
L  ML 4
ML 3 +
K 4 = [ML 4 ]/[ML 3 ][L]
where K 1 , K 2 , etc., are referred to as stepwise stability constants.
Alternatively, we can write the overall stability constant thus:
4
M + 4L  ML 4
β 4 = [ML 4 ]/[M][L]
The stepwise and overall stability constant are therefore related as follows:
β 4 = K 1 × K 2 × K 3 × K 4 or more generally,
255
Coordination Compoundsβ n =
K 1 × K 2 × K 3 × K 4 ....... K n
If we take as an example, the steps involved in the formation of the
cuprammonium ion, we have the following:
Cu
2+
+ NH 3
2+
Cu(NH 3 )
Cu(NH 3 )
+ NH 3
2+
2+
2+
K 1 = [Cu(NH 3 ) ]/[Cu ][NH 3 ]
2+
Cu(NH 3 ) 2
2+
2+
K 2 = [Cu(NH 3 ) 2 ]/[ Cu(NH 3 ) ][NH 3 ] etc.
where K 1 , K 2 are the stepwise stability constants and overall stability
constant.
2+
2+
4
Also β 4 = [Cu(NH 3 ) 4 ]/[Cu ][NH 3 )
The addition of the four amine groups to copper shows a pattern
found for most formation constants, in that the successive stability
constants decrease. In this case, the four constants are:
logK 1 = 4.0, logK 2 = 3.2, logK 3 = 2.7, logK 4 = 2.0 or log β 4 = 11.9
The instability constant or the dissociation constant of coordination
compounds is defined as the reciprocal of the formation constant.
Intext Question
9.11 Calculate the overall complex dissociation equilibrium constant
2+
13
for the Cu(NH 3 ) 4 ion, given that β 4 for this complex is 2.1 × 10 .
9.8 Importance
and
Applications
of
Coordination
Compounds
Chemistry 256
The coordination compounds are of great importance. These compounds
are widely present in the mineral, plant and animal worlds and are
known to play many important functions in the area of analytical
chemistry, metallurgy, biological systems, industry and medicine. These
are described below:
• Coordination compounds find use in many qualitative and
quantitative chemical analysis. The familiar colour reactions given
by metal ions with a number of ligands (especially chelating ligands),
as a result of formation of coordination entities, form the basis for
their detection and estimation by classical and instrumental methods
of analysis. Examples of such reagents include EDTA, DMG
(dimethylglyoxime), α–nitroso–β–naphthol, cupron, etc.
• Hardness of water is estimated by simple titration with Na 2 EDTA.
2+
2+
The Ca and Mg ions form stable complexes with EDTA. The
selective estimation of these ions can be done due to difference in
the stability constants of calcium and magnesium complexes.
• Some important extraction processes of metals, like those of silver and
gold, make use of complex formation. Gold, for example, combines with
cyanide in the presence of oxygen and water to form the coordination
–
entity [Au(CN) 2 ] in aqueous solution. Gold can be separated in metallic
form from this solution by the addition of zinc (Unit 6).
• Similarly, purification of metals can be achieved through formation
and subsequent decomposition of their coordination compounds.
For example, impure nickel is converted to [Ni(CO) 4 ], which is
decomposed to yield pure nickel.•
•
•
•
•
Coordination compounds are of great importance in biological
systems. The pigment responsible for photosynthesis, chlorophyll,
is a coordination compound of magnesium. Haemoglobin, the red
pigment of blood which acts as oxygen carrier is a coordination
compound of iron. Vitamin B 12 , cyanocobalamine, the anti–
pernicious anaemia factor, is a coordination compound of cobalt.
Among the other compounds of biological importance with
coordinated metal ions are the enzymes like, carboxypeptidase A
and carbonic anhydrase (catalysts of biological systems).
Coordination compounds are used as catalysts for many industrial
processes. Examples include rhodium complex, [(Ph 3 P) 3 RhCl], a
Wilkinson catalyst, is used for the hydrogenation of alkenes.
Articles can be electroplated with silver and gold much more
smoothly and evenly from solutions of the complexes, [Ag(CN) 2 ] –
–
and [Au(CN) 2 ] than from a solution of simple metal ions.
In black and white photography, the developed film is fixed by
washing with hypo solution which dissolves the undecomposed
3–
AgBr to form a complex ion, [Ag(S 2 O 3 ) 2 ] .
There is growing interest in the use of chelate therapy in medicinal
chemistry. An example is the treatment of problems caused by the
presence of metals in toxic proportions in plant/animal systems.
Thus, excess of copper and iron are removed by the chelating ligands
D–penicillamine and desferrioxime B via the formation of coordination
compounds. EDTA is used in the treatment of lead poisoning. Some
coordination compounds of platinum effectively inhibit the growth
of tumours. Examples are: cis–platin and related compounds.
Summary
The chemistry of coordination compounds is an important and challenging
area of modern inorganic chemistry. During the last fifty years, advances in this
area, have provided development of new concepts and models of bonding and
molecular structure, novel breakthroughs in chemical industry and vital insights
into the functioning of critical components of biological systems.
The first systematic attempt at explaining the formation, reactions, structure
and bonding of a coordination compound was made by A. Werner. His theory
postulated the use of two types of linkages (primary and secondary) by a metal
atom/ion in a coordination compound. In the modern language of chemistry
these linkages are recognised as the ionisable (ionic) and non-ionisable (covalent)
bonds, respectively. Using the property of isomerism, Werner predicted the
geometrical shapes of a large number of coordination entities.
The Valence Bond Theory (VBT) explains with reasonable success, the
formation, magnetic behaviour and geometrical shapes of coordination compounds.
It, however, fails to provide a quantitative interpretation of magnetic behaviour
and has nothing to say about the optical properties of these compounds.
The Crystal Field Theory (CFT) to coordination compounds is based on the
effect of different crystal fields (provided by the ligands taken as point charges),
on the degeneracy of d orbital energies of the central metal atom/ion. The
splitting of the d orbitals provides different electronic arrangements in strong
and weak crystal fields. The treatment provides for quantitative estimations of
orbital separation energies, magnetic moments and spectral and stability
257
Coordination Compoundsparameters. However, the assumption that ligands consititute point charges
creates many theoretical difficulties.
The metal–carbon bond in metal carbonyls possesses both σ and π character.
The ligand to metal is σ bond and metal to ligand is π bond. This unique synergic
bonding provides stability to metal carbonyls.
The stability of coordination compounds is measured in terms of stepwise
β ). The
stability (or formation) constant (K) or overall stability constant (β
stabilisation of coordination compound due to chelation is called the chelate
effect. The stability of coordination compounds is related to Gibbs energy, enthalpy
and entropy terms.
Coordination compounds are of great importance. These compounds provide
critical insights into the functioning and structures of vital components of
biological systems. Coordination compounds also find extensive applications in
metallurgical processes, analytical and medicinal chemistry.
Exercises
9.1 Explain the bonding in coordination compounds in terms of Werner’s postulates.
9.2 FeSO 4 solution mixed with (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 solution in 1:1 molar ratio gives the
2+
test of Fe ion but CuSO 4 solution mixed with aqueous ammonia in 1:4
2+
molar ratio does not give the test of Cu ion. Explain why?
9.3 Explain with two examples each of the following: coordination entity, ligand,
coordination number, coordination polyhedron, homoleptic and heteroleptic.
9.4 What is meant by unidentate, didentate and ambidentate ligands? Give two
examples for each.
9.5 Specify the oxidation numbers of the metals in the following coordination entities:
2+
2–
(i) [Co(H 2 O)(CN)(en) 2 ]
(iii) [PtCl 4 ]
(v) [Cr(NH 3 ) 3 Cl 3 ]
+
(ii) [CoBr 2 (en) 2 ]
(iv) K 3 [Fe(CN) 6 ]
9.6 Using IUPAC norms write the formulas for the following:
(i) Tetrahydroxidozincate(II)
(vi) Hexaamminecobalt(III) sulphate
(ii) Potassium tetrachloridopalladate(II) (vii) Potassium tri(oxalato)chromate(III)
(iii) Diamminedichloridoplatinum(II)
(viii) Hexaammineplatinum(IV)
(iv) Potassium tetracyanidonickelate(II) (ix) Tetrabromidocuprate(II)
(v) Pentaamminenitrito-O-cobalt(III) (x) Pentaamminenitrito-N-cobalt(III)
9.7
Using IUPAC norms write the systematic names of the following:
(i) [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ]Cl 3
(ii) [Pt(NH 3 ) 2 Cl(NH 2 CH 3 )]Cl
3+
(iii) [Ti(H 2 O) 6 ]
(iv) [Co(NH 3 ) 4 Cl(NO 2 )]Cl
2+
(v) [Mn(H 2 O) 6 ]
2–
(vi) [NiCl 4 ]
(vii) [Ni(NH 3 ) 6 ]Cl 2
3+
(viii) [Co(en) 3 ]
(ix) [Ni(CO) 4 ]
9.8 List various types of isomerism possible for coordination compounds, giving
an example of each.
9.9 How many geometrical isomers are possible in the following coordination entities?
(i) [Cr(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ] 3–
(ii) [Co(NH 3 ) 3 Cl 3 ]
9.10
Draw the structures of optical isomers of:
(i) [Cr(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ] 3–
Chemistry 258
(ii) [PtCl 2 (en) 2 ] 2+
(iii) [Cr(NH 3 ) 2 Cl 2 (en)] +9.11
Draw all the isomers (geometrical and optical) of:
+
2+
(i) [CoCl 2 (en) 2 ]
(ii) [Co(NH 3 )Cl(en) 2 ]
+
(iii) [Co(NH 3 ) 2 Cl 2 (en)]
9.12 Write all the geometrical isomers of [Pt(NH 3 )(Br)(Cl)(py)] and how many of
these will exhibit optical isomers?
9.13 Aqueous copper sulphate solution (blue in colour) gives:
(i) a green precipitate with aqueous potassium fluoride and
(ii) a bright green solution with aqueous potassium chloride. Explain these
experimental results.
9.14 What is the coordination entity formed when excess of aqueous KCN is
added to an aqueous solution of copper sulphate? Why is it that no precipitate
of copper sulphide is obtained when H 2 S(g) is passed through this solution?
9.15 Discuss the nature of bonding in the following coordination entities on the
basis of valence bond theory:
4–
3–
3–
3–
(i) [Fe(CN) 6 ]
(ii) [FeF 6 ]
(iii) [Co(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]
(iv) [CoF 6 ]
9.16 Draw figure to show the splitting of d orbitals in an octahedral crystal field.
9.17 What is spectrochemical series? Explain the difference between a weak
field ligand and a strong field ligand.
9.18 What is crystal field splitting energy? How does the magnitude of ∆ o decide
the actual configuration of d orbitals in a coordination entity?
9.19 [Cr(NH 3 ) 6 ]
3+
is paramagnetic while [Ni(CN) 4 ]
2+
2–
is diamagnetic. Explain why?
2–
9.20 A solution of [Ni(H 2 O) 6 ]
Explain.
9.21 [Fe(CN) 6 ]
9.22 Discuss the nature of bonding in metal carbonyls.
9.23 Give the oxidation state, d orbital occupation and coordination number of
the central metal ion in the following complexes:
(i) K 3 [Co(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]
(iii) (NH 4 ) 2 [CoF 4 ]
(ii) cis-[CrCl 2 (en) 2 ]Cl
(iv) [Mn(H 2 O) 6 ]SO 4
9.24 Write down the IUPAC name for each of the following complexes and indicate
the oxidation state, electronic configuration and coordination number. Also
give stereochemistry and magnetic moment of the complex:
(i) K[Cr(H 2 O) 2 (C 2 O 4 ) 2 ].3H 2 O
(iii) [CrCl 3 (py) 3 ]
(v) K 4 [Mn(CN) 6 ]
(ii) [Co(NH 3 ) 5 Cl - ]Cl 2
(iv) Cs[FeCl 4 ]
9.25 What is meant by stability of a coordination compound in solution? State
the factors which govern stability of complexes.
9.26 What is meant by the chelate effect? Give an example.
9.27 Discuss briefly giving an example in each case the role of coordination
compounds in:
(i) biological systems
(iii) analytical chemistry
(ii) medicinal chemistry and
(iv) extraction/metallurgy of metals.
9.28 How many ions are produced from the complex Co(NH 3 ) 6 Cl 2 in solution?
(i) 6
(ii) 4
(iii) 3
(iv) 2
9.29 Amongst the following ions which one has the highest magnetic moment value?
3+
2+
2+
(i) [Cr(H 2 O) 6 ]
(ii) [Fe(H 2 O) 6 ] (iii) [Zn(H 2 O) 6 ]
9.30 The oxidation number of cobalt in K[Co(CO) 4 ] is
(i) +1
(ii) +3
(iii) –1
4–
and [Fe(H 2 O) 6 ]
is green but a solution of [Ni(CN) 4 ]
2+
is colourless.
are of different colours in dilute solutions. Why?
(iv) –3
259
Coordination Compounds9.31
9.32
Amongst the following, the most stable complex is
3+
3+
3–
(i) [Fe(H 2 O) 6 ]
(ii) [Fe(NH 3 ) 6 ] (iii) [Fe(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]
(iv) [FeCl 6 ]
3–
What will be the correct order for the wavelengths of absorption in the
visible region for the following:
4–
2+
2+
[Ni(NO 2 ) 6 ] , [Ni(NH 3 ) 6 ] , [Ni(H 2 O) 6 ] ?
Answers to Some Intext Questions
9.1 (i) [Co(NH 3 ) 4 (H 2 O) 2 ]Cl 3
(ii) K 2 [Ni(CN) 4 ]
(iii) [Cr(en) 3 ]Cl 3
9.2 (i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
–
(iv) [Pt(NH 3 )BrCl(NO 2 )]
(v) [PtCl 2 (en) 2 ](NO 3 ) 2
(vi) Fe 4 [Fe(CN) 6 ] 3
Hexaamminecobalt(III) chloride
Pentaamminechloridocobalt(III) chloride
Potassium hexacyanidoferrate(III)
Potassium trioxalatoferrate(III)
Potassium tetrachloridopalladate(II)
Diamminechlorido(methanamine)platinum(II) chloride
9.3 (i) Both geometrical (cis-, trans-) and optical isomers for cis can exist.
(ii) Two optical isomers can exist.
(iii) There are 10 possible isomers. (Hint: There are geometrical, ionisation
and linkage isomers possible).
(iv) Geometrical (cis-, trans-) isomers can exist.
9.4 The ionisation isomers dissolve in water to yield different ions and thus
react differently to various reagents:
2+
[Co(NH 3 ) 5 Br]SO 4 + Ba → BaSO 4 (s)
2+
[Co(NH 3 ) 5 SO 4 ]Br + Ba → No reaction
[Co(NH 3 ) 5 Br]SO 4 + Ag + → No reaction
+
[Co(NH 3 ) 5 SO 4 ]Br + Ag → AgBr (s)
2–
9.6 In Ni(CO) 4 , Ni is in zero oxidation state whereas in NiCl 4 , it is in +2 oxidation
state. In the presence of CO ligand, the unpaired d electrons of Ni pair up
–
but Cl being a weak ligand is unable to pair up the unpaired electrons.
–
9.7 In presence of CN , (a strong ligand) the 3d electrons pair up leaving only
2
3
one unpaired electron. The hybridisation is d sp forming inner orbital
complex. In the presence of H 2 O, (a weak ligand), 3d electrons do not pair
3 2
up. The hybridisation is sp d forming an outer orbital complex containing
five unpaired electrons, it is strongly paramagnetic.
9.8 In the presence of NH 3 , the 3d electrons pair up leaving two d orbitals
2
3
empty to be involved in d sp hybridisation forming inner orbital complex
3+
in case of [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] .
2+
8
In Ni(NH 3 ) 6 , Ni is in +2 oxidation state and has d configuration, the
3 2
hybridisation involved is sp d forming outer orbital complex.
2
9.9 For square planar shape, the hybridisation is dsp . Hence the unpaired
2
electrons in 5d orbital pair up to make one d orbital empty for dsp
hybridisation. Thus there is no unpaired electron.
9.11 The overall dissociation constant is the reciprocal of overall stability
–14
constant i.e. 1/ β 4 = 4.7 × 10
Chemistry 260
