PHYSICS
P ART – II
T EXTBOOK
FOR
C LASS XIIPHYSICS
P ART – II
T EXTBOOK
FOR
C LASS XIIFirst Edition
March 2007 Chaitra 1928
ISBN 81-7450-631-4 (Part I)
ISBN 81-7450-671-3 (Part II)
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
Reprinted
December 2007 Agrahayana 1929
December 2008 Pausa 1930
December 2009 Pausa 1931
January 2011 Pausa 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
December 2014 Pausa 1936
December 2015 Agrahayana 1937
February 2017 Magha 1938
PD 360T HK
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is
published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
` 140.00
Publication Team
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo
Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and printed at
Pushpak Press Private Limited, 203-204,
DSIDC Sheds, Okhla Industrial Area,
Phase-I, New Delhi 110 020
Head, Publication
Division : M. Siraj Anwar
Chief Editor : Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
Manager : Gautam Ganguly
Chief Production
Officer (In-charge) : Arun Chitkara
Assistant Editor : R. N. Bhardwaj
Production Assistant : Sunil Kumar
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Shweta RaoF OREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at school must
be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish
learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and
community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement
this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (NPE), 1986.
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will take to
encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging
with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in
the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the
required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching
and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried
to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on
experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard
work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the
Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor A.W. Joshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several
teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously
permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to
the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
New Delhi
20 November 2006
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and TrainingP REFACE
It gives me pleasure to place this book in the hands of the students, teachers and the
public at large (whose role cannot be overlooked). It is a natural sequel to the Class XI
textbook which was brought out in 2006. This book is also a trimmed version of the
textbooks which existed so far. The chapter on thermal and chemical effects of current
has been cut out. This topic has also been dropped from the CBSE syllabus. Similarly,
the chapter on communications has been substantially curtailed. It has been rewritten
in an easily comprehensible form.
Although most other chapters have been based on the earlier versions, several parts
and sections in them have been rewritten. The Development Team has been guided by
the feedback received from innumerable teachers across the country.
In producing these books, Class XI as well as Class XII, there has been a basic
change of emphasis. Both the books present physics to students without assuming
that they would pursue this subject beyond the higher secondary level. This new view
has been prompted by the various observations and suggestions made in the National
Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005. Similarly, in today’s educational scenario where
students can opt for various combinations of subjects, we cannot assume that a physics
student is also studying mathematics. Therefore, physics has to be presented, so to
say, in a stand-alone form.
As in Class XI textbook, some interesting box items have been inserted in many
chapters. They are not meant for teaching or examinations. Their purpose is to catch
the attention of the reader, to show some applications in daily life or in other areas of
science and technology, to suggest a simple experiment, to show connection of concepts
in different areas of physics, and in general, to break the monotony and enliven the
book.
Features like Summary, Points to Ponder, Exercises and Additional Exercises at
the end of each chapter, and Examples have been retained. Several concept-based
Exercises have been transferred from end-of-chapter Exercises to Examples with
Solutions in the text. It is hoped that this will make the concepts discussed in the
chapter more comprehensible. Several new examples and exercises have been added.
Students wishing to pursue physics further would find Points to Ponder and Additional
Exercises very useful and thoughtful. To provide resources beyond the textbook and
to encourage eLearning, each chapter has been provided with some relevant website
addresses under the title ePhysics. These sites provide additional materials on specific
topics and also provide learners the opportunites for interactive demonstrations/
experiments.
The intricate concepts of physics must be understood, comprehended and
appreciated. Students must learn to ask questions like ‘why’, ‘how’, ‘how do we know
it’. They will find almost always that the question ‘why’ has no answer within the domain
of physics and science in general. But that itself is a learning experience, is it not? On
the other hand, the question ‘how’ has been reasonably well answered by physicists in
the case of most natural phenomena. In fact, with the understanding of how things
happen, it has been possible to make use of many phenomena to create technological
applications for the use of humans.For example, consider statements in a book, like ‘A negatively charged electron is
attracted by the positively charged plate’, or ‘In this experiment, light (or electron)
behaves like a wave’. You will realise that it is not possible to answer ‘why’. This question
belongs to the domain of philosophy or metaphysics. But we can answer ‘how’, we can
find the force acting, we can find the wavelength of the photon (or electron), we can
determine how things behave under different conditions, and we can develop instruments
which will use these phenomena to our advantage.
It has been a pleasure to work for these books at the higher secondary level, along
with a team of members. The Textbook Development Team, the Review Team and Editing
Teams involved college and university teachers, teachers from Indian Institutes of
Technology, scientists from national institutes and laboratories, as well as higher
secondary teachers. The feedback and critical look provided by higher secondary
teachers in the various teams are highly laudable. Most box items were generated by
members of one or the other team, but three of them were generated by friends and
well-wishers not part of any team. We are thankful to Dr P.N. Sen of Pune, Professor
Roopmanjari Ghosh of Delhi and Dr Rajesh B Khaparde of Mumbai for allowing us to
use their box items, respectively in Chapters 3, 4 (Part I) and 9 (Part II). We are very
thankful to the members of the Review and Editing Workshops to discuss and refine
the first draft of the textbook. We also express our gratitude to Prof. Krishna Kumar,
Director, NCERT, for entrusting us with the task of presenting this textbook as a part of
the national effort for improving science education. I also thank Prof. G. Ravindra, Joint
Director, NCERT, for his help from time-to-time. Prof. Hukum Singh, Head, Department
of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, was always willing to help us in our
endeavour in every possible way.
We welcome suggestions and comments from our valued users, especially students
and teachers. We wish our young readers a happy journey into the exciting realm of
physics.
A. W. J OSHI
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee
viiiT EXTBOOK D EVELOPMENT C OMMITTEE
C HAIRPERSON , A DVISORY C OMMITTEE
FOR
T EXTBOOKS
IN
S CIENCE
AND
M ATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
(IUCAA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University Campus, Pune
C HIEF A DVISOR
A.W. Joshi, Honorary Visiting Scientist, National Centre for Radio Astrophysics (NCRA), Pune
University Campus, Pune (Formerly Professor at Department of Physics, University of Pune)
M EMBERS
A.K. Ghatak, Emeritus Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology,
New Delhi
Alika Khare, Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Anjali Kshirsagar, Reader, Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune
Anuradha Mathur, PGT , Modern School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
Atul Mody, Lecturer (S.G.), VES College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Mumbai
B.K. Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Chitra Goel, PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Tyagraj Nagar, New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.C. Pradhan, Professor, Homi Bhabha Centre of Science Education (TIFR), Mumbai
N. Panchapakesan, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of
Delhi, Delhi
R. Joshi, Lecturer (S.G.), DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S. Rai Choudhary, Professor, Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.K. Upadhyay, PGT, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Muzaffar Nagar
S.N. Prabhakara, PGT, DM School, Regional Institute of Education (NCERT), Mysore
V.H. Raybagkar, Reader, Nowrosjee Wadia College, Pune
Vishwajeet Kulkarni, Teacher (Grade I ), Higher Secondary Section, Smt. Parvatibai Chowgule
College, Margao, Goa
M EMBER - COORDINATOR
V.P. Srivastava, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New DelhiA CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the valuable
contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of Physics Textbook
for Class XII. The Council also acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics
for reviewing and refining the manuscripts of this book:
Anu Venugopalan, Lecturer, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, GGSIP University, Delhi;
A.K. Das, PGT, St. Xavier’s Senior Secondary School, Delhi; Bharati Kukkal, PGT, Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi; D.A. Desai, Lecturer (Retd.), Ruparel College, Mumbai;
Devendra Kumar, PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi; I.K. Gogia, PGT,
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Gole Market, New Delhi; K.C. Sharma, Reader, Regional Institute of Education
(NCERT), Ajmer; M.K. Nandy, Associate Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of
Technology, Guwahati; M.N. Bapat, Reader, Regional Institute of Education (NCERT), Mysore;
R. Bhattacharjee, Asstt. Professor, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati; R.S. Das, Vice-Principal (Retd.), Balwant Ray Mehta
Senior Secondary School, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi; Sangeeta D. Gadre, Reader, Kirori Mal College,
Delhi; Suresh Kumar, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka, New Delhi; Sushma Jaireth, Reader,
Department of Women’s Studies, NCERT, New Delhi; Shyama Rath, Reader, Department of Physics
and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi; Yashu Kumar, PGT, Kulachi Hans Raj Model School,
Ashok Vihar, Delhi.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics
for the editing and finalisation of this book: B.B. Tripathi, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi; Dipan K. Ghosh, Professor, Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai; Dipanjan Mitra, Scientist, National Centre for Radio
Astrophysics (TIFR), Pune; G.K. Mehta, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Inter-University Accelerator
Centre, New Delhi; G.S. Visweswaran, Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi; H.C. Kandpal, Head, Optical Radiation Standards, National
Physical Laboratory, New Delhi; H.S. Mani, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Institute of Mathematical
Sciences, Chennai; K. Thyagarajan, Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi; P.C. Vinod Kumar, Professor, Department of Physics, Sardar Patel
University, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat; S. Annapoorni, Professor, Department of Physics and
Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi; S.C. Dutta Roy, Emeritus Professor, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi; S.D. Joglekar, Professor,
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur; V. Sundara Raja, Professor, Sri
Venkateswara University, Tirupati.
Special thanks are due to Hukum Singh, Professor and Head, DESM, NCERT for his support.
The Council also acknowledges the support provided by the APC office and the administrative
staff of the DESM; Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station; Inder Kumar, DTP Operator;
Mohd. Qamar Tabrez, Copy Editor ; Rishi Pal Singh, Sr. Proof Reader, NCER T and
Ashima Srivastava, Proof Reader in shaping this book.
The contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book are also duly
acknowledged.Contents of Physics Part I
Class XII
CHAPTER ONE
E LECTRIC C HARGES AND F IELDS
1
CHAPTER TWO
E LECTROSTATIC P OTENTIAL AND C APACITANCE 51
CHAPTER THREE
C URRENT E LECTRICITY 93
CHAPTER FOUR
M OVING C HARGES AND M AGNETISM 132
CHAPTER FIVE
M AGNETISM AND M ATTER 173
CHAPTER SIX
E LECTROMAGNETIC I NDUCTION 204
CHAPTER SEVEN
A LTERNATING C URRENT 233
CHAPTER EIGHT
E LECTROMAGNETIC W AVES 269
ANSWERS 288CONTENTS
F OREWORD
P REFACE
v
vii
CHAPTER NINE
R AY O PTICS AND O PTICAL I NSTRUMENTS
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
Introduction
Reflection of Light by Spherical Mirrors
Refraction
Total Internal Reflection
Refraction at Spherical Surfaces and by Lenses
Refraction through a Prism
Dispersion by a Prism
Some Natural Phenomena due to Sunlight
Optical Instruments
309
310
316
319
323
330
332
333
335
CHAPTER TEN
W AVE O PTICS
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
Introduction
Huygens Principle
Refraction and reflection of plane waves using Huygens Principle
Coherent and Incoherent Addition of Waves
Interference of Light Waves and Young’s Experiment
Diffraction
Polarisation
351
353
355
360
362
367
376
CHAPTER ELEVEN
D UAL N ATURE OF R ADIATION AND M ATTER
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
Introduction
Electron Emission
Photoelectric Effect
Experimental Study of Photoelectric Effect
Photoelectric Effect and Wave Theory of Light
Einstein’s Photoelectric Equation: Energy Quantum of Radiation
Particle Nature of Light: The Photon
Wave Nature of Matter
Davisson and Germer Experiment
386
387
388
389
393
393
395
398
403CHAPTER TWELVE
A TOMS
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
Introduction
Alpha-particle Scattering and Rutherford’s Nuclear Model of Atom
Atomic Spectra
Bohr Model of the Hydrogen Atom
The Line Spectra of the Hydrogen Atom
DE Broglie’s Explanation of Bohr’s Second Postulate of Quantisation
414
415
420
422
428
430
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
N UCLEI
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5
13.6
13.7
Introduction
Atomic Masses and Composition of Nucleus
Size of the Nucleus
Mass-Energy and Nuclear Binding Energy
Nuclear Force
Radioactivity
Nuclear Energy
438
438
441
442
445
446
451
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
S EMICONDUCTOR E LECTRONICS : M ATERIALS , DEVICES AND SIMPLE CIRCUITS
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
14.7
14.8
14.9
14.10
14.11
Introduction
Classification of Metals, Conductors and Semiconductors
Intrinsic Semiconductor
Extrinsic Semiconductor
p-n Junction
Semiconductor diode
Application of Junction Diode as a Rectifier
Special Purpose p-n Junction Diodes
Junction Transistor
Digital Electronics and Logic Gates
Integrated Circuits
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
C OMMUNICATION S YSTEMS
15.1 Introduction
15.2 Elements of a Communication System
15.3 Basic Terminology Used in Electronic Communication Systems
15.4 Bandwidth of Signals
15.5 Bandwidth of Transmission Medium
15.6 Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves
xiv
467
468
472
474
478
479
483
485
490
501
505
513
513
515
517
518
51915.7
15.8
15.9
15.10
Modulation and its Necessity
Amplitude Modulation
Production of Amplitude Modulated Wave
Detection of Amplitude Modulated Wave
522
524
525
526
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 528
APPENDICES 532
ANSWERS 534
BIBLIOGRAPHY 552
INDEX 554
xvC OVER DESIGN
(Adapted from http://nobelprize.org and
the Nobel Prize in Physics 2006)
Different stages in the evolution of
the universe.
B ACK C OVER
(Adapted from http://www.iter.org and
http://www.dae.gov.in)
Cut away view of International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER)
device. The man in the bottom shows the scale.
ITER is a joint international research and development project that
aims to demonstrate the scientific and technical feasibility of fusion power.
India is one of the seven full partners in the project, the others being
the European Union (represented by EURATOM), Japan, the People’s
Republic of China, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the
USA. ITER will be constructed in Europe, at Cadarache in the South of
France and will provide 500 MW of fusion power.
Fusion is the energy source of the sun and the stars. On earth, fusion
research is aimed at demonstrating that this energy source can be used to
produce electricity in a safe and environmentally benign way, with
abundant fuel resources, to meet the needs of a growing world population.
For details of India’s role, see Nuclear India, Vol. 39, No. 11-12/
May-June 2006, issue available at Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
website mentioned above.
Chapter Nine
RAY OPTICS
AND OPTICAL
INSTRUMENTS
9.1 I NTRODUCTION
Nature has endowed the human eye (retina) with the sensitivity to detect
electromagnetic waves within a small range of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Electromagnetic radiation belonging to this region of the
spectrum (wavelength of about 400 nm to 750 nm) is called light. It is
mainly through light and the sense of vision that we know and interpret
the world around us.
There are two things that we can intuitively mention about light from
common experience. First, that it travels with enormous speed and second,
that it travels in a straight line. It took some time for people to realise that
the speed of light is finite and measurable. Its presently accepted value
in vacuum is c = 2.99792458 × 10 8 m s –1 . For many purposes, it suffices
to take c = 3 × 10 8 m s –1 . The speed of light in vacuum is the highest
speed attainable in nature.
The intuitive notion that light travels in a straight line seems to
contradict what we have learnt in Chapter 8, that light is an
electromagnetic wave of wavelength belonging to the visible part of the
spectrum. How to reconcile the two facts? The answer is that the
wavelength of light is very small compared to the size of ordinary objects
that we encounter commonly (generally of the order of a few cm or larger).
In this situation, as you will learn in Chapter 10, a light wave can be
considered to travel from one point to another, along a straight line joiningPhysics
them. The path is called a ray of light, and a bundle of such rays
constitutes a beam of light.
In this chapter, we consider the phenomena of reflection, refraction
and dispersion of light, using the ray picture of light. Using the basic
laws of reflection and refraction, we shall study the image formation by
plane and spherical reflecting and refracting surfaces. We then go on to
describe the construction and working of some important optical
instruments, including the human eye.
P ARTICLE
MODEL OF LIGHT
Newton’s fundamental contributions to mathematics, mechanics, and gravitation often blind
us to his deep experimental and theoretical study of light. He made pioneering contributions
in the field of optics. He further developed the corpuscular model of light proposed by
Descartes. It presumes that light energy is concentrated in tiny particles called corpuscles.
He further assumed that corpuscles of light were massless elastic particles. With his
understanding of mechanics, he could come up with a simple model of reflection and
refraction. It is a common observation that a ball bouncing from a smooth plane surface
obeys the laws of reflection. When this is an elastic collision, the magnitude of the velocity
remains the same. As the surface is smooth, there is no force acting parallel to the surface,
so the component of momentum in this direction also remains the same. Only the component
perpendicular to the surface, i.e., the normal component of the momentum, gets reversed
in reflection. Newton argued that smooth surfaces like mirrors reflect the corpuscles in a
similar manner.
In order to explain the phenomena of refraction, Newton postulated that the speed of
the corpuscles was greater in water or glass than in air. However, later on it was discovered
that the speed of light is less in water or glass than in air.
In the field of optics, Newton – the experimenter, was greater than Newton – the theorist.
He himself observed many phenomena, which were difficult to understand in terms of
particle nature of light. For example, the colours observed due to a thin film of oil on water.
Property of partial reflection of light is yet another such example. Everyone who has looked
into the water in a pond sees image of the face in it, but also sees the bottom of the pond.
Newton argued that some of the corpuscles, which fall on the water, get reflected and some
get transmitted. But what property could distinguish these two kinds of corpuscles? Newton
had to postulate some kind of unpredictable, chance phenomenon, which decided whether
an individual corpuscle would be reflected or not. In explaining other phenomena, however,
the corpuscles were presumed to behave as if they are identical. Such a dilemma does not
occur in the wave picture of light. An incoming wave can be divided into two weaker waves
at the boundary between air and water.
9.2 R EFLECTION
310
OF
L IGHT
BY
S PHERICAL M IRRORS
We are familiar with the laws of reflection. The angle of reflection (i.e., the
angle between reflected ray and the normal to the reflecting surface or
the mirror) equals the angle of incidence (angle between incident ray and
the normal). Also that the incident ray, reflected ray and the normal to
the reflecting surface at the point of incidence lie in the same plane
(Fig. 9.1). These laws are valid at each point on any reflecting surface
whether plane or curved. However, we shall restrict our discussion to the
special case of curved surfaces, that is, spherical surfaces. The normal inRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
this case is to be taken as normal to the tangent
to surface at the point of incidence. That is, the
normal is along the radius, the line joining the
centre of curvature of the mirror to the point of
incidence.
We have already studied that the geometric
centre of a spherical mirror is called its pole while
that of a spherical lens is called its optical centre.
The line joining the pole and the centre of curvature
of the spherical mirror is known as the principal
axis. In the case of spherical lenses, the principal
axis is the line joining the optical centre with its
principal focus as you will see later.
FIGURE 9.1 The incident ray, reflected ray
and the normal to the reflecting surface lie
in the same plane.
9.2.1 Sign convention
To derive the relevant formulae for reflection by spherical mirrors and
refraction by spherical lenses, we must first adopt a sign convention for
measuring distances. In this book, we shall follow the Cartesian sign
convention. According to this
convention, all distances are measured
from the pole of the mirror or the optical
centre of the lens. The distances
measured in the same direction as the
incident light are taken as positive and
those measured in the direction
opposite to the direction of incident
light are taken as negative (Fig. 9.2).
The heights measured upwards with
respect to x-axis and normal to the
principal axis (x-axis) of the mirror/
lens are taken as positive (Fig. 9.2). The
heights measured downwards are
FIGURE 9.2 The Cartesian Sign Convention.
taken as negative.
With a common accepted convention, it turns out that a single formula
for spherical mirrors and a single formula for spherical lenses can handle
all different cases.
9.2.2 Focal length of spherical mirrors
Figure 9.3 shows what happens when a parallel beam of light is incident
on (a) a concave mirror, and (b) a convex mirror. We assume that the rays
are paraxial, i.e., they are incident at points close to the pole P of the mirror
and make small angles with the principal axis. The reflected rays converge
at a point F on the principal axis of a concave mirror [Fig. 9.3(a)].
For a convex mirror, the reflected rays appear to diverge from a point F
on its principal axis [Fig. 9.3(b)]. The point F is called the principal focus
of the mirror. If the parallel paraxial beam of light were incident, making
some angle with the principal axis, the reflected rays would converge (or
appear to diverge) from a point in a plane through F normal to the principal
axis. This is called the focal plane of the mirror [Fig. 9.3(c)].
311Physics
FIGURE 9.3 Focus of a concave and convex mirror.
The distance between the focus F and the pole P of the mirror is called
the focal length of the mirror, denoted by f. We now show that f = R/2,
where R is the radius of curvature of the mirror. The geometry
of reflection of an incident ray is shown in Fig. 9.4.
Let C be the centre of curvature of the mirror. Consider a
ray parallel to the principal axis striking the mirror at M. Then
CM will be perpendicular to the mirror at M. Let θ be the angle
of incidence, and MD be the perpendicular from M on the
principal axis. Then,
∠MCP = θ and ∠MFP = 2 θ
Now,
MD
MD
and tan 2 θ =
(9.1)
CD
FD
For small θ , which is true for paraxial rays, tan θ ≈ θ,
tan 2 θ ≈ 2 θ. Therefore, Eq. (9.1) gives
tan θ =
FIGURE 9.4 Geometry of
reflection of an incident ray on
(a) concave spherical mirror,
and (b) convex spherical mirror.
MD
MD
= 2
FD
CD
CD
or, FD =
(9.2)
2
Now, for small θ , the point D is very close to the point P.
Therefore, FD = f and CD = R. Equation (9.2) then gives
f = R/2
(9.3)
9.2.3 The mirror equation
312
If rays emanating from a point actually meet at another point after
reflection and/or refraction, that point is called the image of the first
point. The image is real if the rays actually converge to the point; it isRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
virtual if the rays do not actually meet but appear
to diverge from the point when produced
backwards. An image is thus a point-to-point
correspondence with the object established
through reflection and/or refraction.
In principle, we can take any two rays
emanating from a point on an object, trace their
paths, find their point of intersection and thus,
obtain the image of the point due to reflection at a
spherical mirror. In practice, however, it is
convenient to choose any two of the following rays:
(i) The ray from the point which is parallel to the
principal axis. The reflected ray goes through
FIGURE 9.5 Ray diagram for image
the focus of the mirror.
formation by a concave mirror.
(ii) The ray passing through the centre of
curvature of a concave mirror or appearing to pass through it for a
convex mirror. The reflected ray simply retraces the path.
(iii) The ray passing through (or directed towards) the focus of the concave
mirror or appearing to pass through (or directed towards) the focus
of a convex mirror. The reflected ray is parallel to the principal axis.
(iv) The ray incident at any angle at the pole. The reflected ray follows
laws of reflection.
Figure 9.5 shows the ray diagram considering three rays. It shows
the image A′B′ (in this case, real) of an object A B formed by a concave
mirror. It does not mean that only three rays emanate from the point A.
An infinite number of rays emanate from any source, in all directions.
Thus, point A′ is image point of A if every ray originating at point A and
falling on the concave mirror after reflection passes through the point A′.
We now derive the mirror equation or the relation between the object
distance (u), image distance (v) and the focal length ( f ).
From Fig. 9.5, the two right-angled triangles A′B′F and MPF are
similar. (For paraxial rays, MP can be considered to be a straight line
perpendicular to CP.) Therefore,
B ′ A ′ B ′ F
=
PM
FP
B ′ A ′ B ′ F
=
( PM = AB)
(9.4)
BA
FP
Since ∠ APB = ∠ A′PB′, the right angled triangles A′B′P and ABP are
also similar. Therefore,
or
B ′ A ′ B ′ P
=
B A BP
Comparing Eqs. (9.4) and (9.5), we get
(9.5)
B ′ F B ′ P – FP B ′ P
=
=
(9.6)
FP
FP
BP
Equation (9.6) is a relation involving magnitude of distances. We now
apply the sign convention. We note that light travels from the object to
the mirror MPN. Hence this is taken as the positive direction. To reach
313Physics
the object AB, image A′B′ as well as the focus F from the pole P, we have
to travel opposite to the direction of incident light. Hence, all the three
will have negative signs. Thus,
B′ P = –v, FP = –f, BP = –u
Using these in Eq. (9.6), we get
– v + f
– v
=
– f
– u
v – f
v
=
f
u
1 1
1
+ =
(9.7)
v u
f
This relation is known as the mirror equation.
The size of the image relative to the size of the object is another
important quantity to consider. We define linear magnification (m) as the
ratio of the height of the image (h′) to the height of the object (h):
or
h ′
(9.8)
h
h and h ′ will be taken positive or negative in accordance with the accepted
sign convention. In triangles A′B′P and ABP, we have,
m =
B ′ A ′
B ′ P
=
BA
BP
With the sign convention, this becomes
– h ′
– v
=
h
– u
so that
h ′
v
= –
(9.9)
h
u
We have derived here the mirror equation, Eq. (9.7), and the
magnification formula, Eq. (9.9), for the case of real, inverted image formed
by a concave mirror. With the proper use of sign convention, these are,
in fact, valid for all the cases of reflection by a spherical mirror (concave
or convex) whether the image formed is real or virtual. Figure 9.6 shows
the ray diagrams for virtual image formed by a concave and convex mirror.
You should verify that Eqs. (9.7) and (9.9) are valid for these cases
as well.
m =
314
FIGURE 9.6 Image formation by (a) a concave mirror with object between
P and F, and (b) a convex mirror.Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
Example 9.1 Suppose that the lower half of the concave mirror’s
reflecting surface in Fig. 9.5 is covered with an opaque (non-reflective)
material. What effect will this have on the image of an object placed
in front of the mirror?
Solution You may think that the image will now show only half of the
object, but taking the laws of reflection to be true for all points of the
remaining part of the mirror, the image will be that of the whole object.
However, as the area of the reflecting surface has been reduced, the
intensity of the image will be low (in this case, half).
Example 9.2 A mobile phone lies along the principal axis of a concave
mirror, as shown in Fig. 9.7. Show by suitable diagram, the formation
of its image. Explain why the magnification is not uniform. Will the
distortion of image depend on the location of the phone with respect
to the mirror?
FIGURE 9.7
Solution
The ray diagram for the formation of the image of the phone is shown
in Fig. 9.7. The image of the part which is on the plane perpendicular
to principal axis will be on the same plane. It will be of the same size,
i.e., B′C = BC. You can yourself realise why the image is distorted.
Example 9.3 An object is placed at (i) 10 cm, (ii) 5 cm in front of a
concave mirror of radius of curvature 15 cm. Find the position, nature,
and magnification of the image in each case.
Solution
The focal length f = –15/2 cm = –7.5 cm
(i) The object distance u = –10 cm. Then Eq. (9.7) gives
1
1
1
+
=
v – 10
– 7 . 5
or
v =
10 × 7 . 5
= – 30 cm
− 2 . 5
v
( − 30)
= –
= –3
u
( − 10)
The image is magnified, real and inverted.
Also, magnification m = –
The image is 30 cm from the mirror on the same side as the object.
315Physics
(ii) The object distance u = –5 cm. Then from Eq. (9.7),
1 1
1
+
=
v − 5 − 7.5
or
v =
5 × 7 . 5
= 15 cm
( 7 . 5 – 5 )
This image is formed at 15 cm behind the mirror. It is a virtual image.
Magnification m = –
15
v
= –
= 3
u
( − 5)
The image is magnified, virtual and erect.
Example 9.4 Suppose while sitting in a parked car, you notice a
jogger approaching towards you in the side view mirror of R = 2 m. If
the jogger is running at a speed of 5 m s –1 , how fast the image of the
jogger appear to move when the jogger is (a) 39 m, (b) 29 m, (c) 19 m,
and (d) 9 m away.
Solution
From the mirror equation, Eq. (9.7), we get
v =
fu
u − f
For convex mirror, since R = 2 m, f = 1 m. Then
( − 39) × 1 39
=
m
− 39 − 1
40
Since the jogger moves at a constant speed of 5 m s –1 , after 1 s the
position of the image v (for u = –39 + 5 = –34) is (34/35 )m.
The shift in the position of image in 1 s is
for u = –39 m, v =
39 34 1365 − 1360
5
1
−
=
=
=
m
40 35
1400
1400
280
Therefore, the average speed of the image when the jogger is between
39 m and 34 m from the mirror, is (1/280) m s –1
Similarly, it can be seen that for u = –29 m, –19 m and –9 m, the
speed with which the image appears to move is
1
1
1
m s –1 ,
m s –1 and
m s –1 , respectively.
150
60
10
Although the jogger has been moving with a constant speed, the speed
of his/her image appears to increase substantially as he/she moves
closer to the mirror. This phenomenon can be noticed by any person
sitting in a stationary car or a bus. In case of moving vehicles, a
similar phenomenon could be observed if the vehicle in the rear is
moving closer with a constant speed.
9.3 R EFRACTION
316
When a beam of light encounters another transparent medium, a part of
light gets reflected back into the first medium while the rest enters the
other. A ray of light represents a beam. The direction of propagation of
an obliquely incident ray of light that enters the other medium, changesRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
at the interface of the two media. This
phenomenon is called refraction of light. Snell
experimentally obtained the following laws of
refraction:
(i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the
normal to the interface at the point of
incidence, all lie in the same plane.
(ii) The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence
to the sine of angle of refraction is constant.
Remember that the angles of incidence (i ) and
refraction (r ) are the angles that the incident
and its refracted ray make with the normal,
respectively. We have
sin i
= n 21
sin r
(9.10)
FIGURE 9.8 Refraction and reflection of light.
where n 21 is a constant, called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first medium. Equation (9.10) is the well-known Snell’s
law of refraction. We note that n 21 is a characteristic of the pair of media
(and also depends on the wavelength of light), but is independent of the
angle of incidence.
From Eq. (9.10), if n 21 > 1, r < i , i.e., the refracted ray bends towards
the normal. In such a case medium 2 is said to be optically denser (or
denser, in short) than medium 1. On the other hand, if n 21 <1, r > i, the
refracted ray bends away from the normal. This is the case when incident
ray in a denser medium refracts into a rarer medium.
Note: Optical density should not be confused with mass density,
which is mass per unit volume. It is possible that mass density of
an optically denser medium may be less than that of an optically
rarer medium (optical density is the ratio of the speed of light in
two media). For example, turpentine and water. Mass density of
turpentine is less than that of water but its optical density is higher.
If n 21 is the refractive index of medium 2
with respect to medium 1 and n 12 the refractive
index of medium 1 with respect to medium 2,
then it should be clear that
n 12 =
1
n 21
(9.11)
It also follows that if n 32 is the refractive
index of medium 3 with respect to medium 2
then n 32 = n 31 × n 12 , where n 31 is the refractive
index of medium 3 with respect to medium 1.
FIGURE 9.9 Lateral shift of a ray refracted
Some elementary results based on the laws
through a parallel-sided slab.
of refraction follow immediately. For a
rectangular slab, refraction takes place at two
interfaces (air-glass and glass-air). It is easily seen from Fig. 9.9 that
317
r 2 = i 1 , i.e., the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray—there is noPhysics
FIGURE 9.10 Apparent depth for
(a) normal, and (b) oblique viewing.
deviation, but it does suffer lateral displacement/
shift with respect to the incident ray. Another familiar
observation is that the bottom of a tank filled with
water appears to be raised (Fig. 9.10). For viewing
near the normal direction, it can be shown that the
apparent depth, (h 1 ) is real depth (h 2 ) divided by
the refractive index of the medium (water).
The refraction of light through the atmosphere
is responsible for many interesting phenomena. For
example, the sun is visible a little before the actual
sunrise and until a little after the actual sunset
due to refraction of light through the atmosphere
(Fig. 9.11). By actual sunrise we mean the actual
crossing of the horizon by the sun. Figure 9.11
shows the actual and apparent positions of the sun
with respect to the horizon. The figure is highly
exaggerated to show the effect. The refractive index
of air with respect to vacuum is 1.00029. Due to
this, the apparent shift in the direction of the sun
is by about half a degree and the corresponding
time difference between actual sunset and apparent
sunset is about 2 minutes (see Example 9.5). The
apparent flattening (oval shape) of the sun at sunset
and sunrise is also due to the same phenomenon.
318
FIGURE 9.11 Advance sunrise and delayed sunset due to
atmospheric refraction.
Example 9.5 The earth takes 24 h to rotate once about its axis. How
much time does the sun take to shift by 1o when viewed from
the earth?
Solution
Time taken for 360° shift = 24 h
Time taken for 1° shift = 24/360 h = 4 min.Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
T HE
DROWNING CHILD , LIFEGUARD AND
S NELL ’ S
LAW
Consider a rectangular swimming pool PQSR; see figure here. A lifeguard sitting at G
outside the pool notices a child drowning at a point C. The guard wants to reach the
child in the shortest possible time. Let SR be the
side of the pool between G and C. Should he/she
take a straight line path GAC between G and C or
GBC in which the path BC in water would be the
shortest, or some other path GXC? The guard knows
that his/her running speed v 1 on ground is higher
than his/her swimming speed v 2 .
Suppose the guard enters water at X. Let GX =l 1
and XC =l 2 . Then the time taken to reach from G to
C would be
t =
l 1 l 2
+
v 1 v 2
To make this time minimum, one has to
differentiate it (with respect to the coordinate of X ) and find the point X when t is a
minimum. On doing all this algebra (which we skip here), we find that the guard should
enter water at a point where Snell’s law is satisfied. To understand this, draw a
perpendicular LM to side SR at X. Let ∠GXM = i and ∠CXL = r. Then it can be seen that t
is minimum when
sin i
v
= 1
sin r v 2
In the case of light v 1 /v 2 , the ratio of the velocity of light in vacuum to that in the
medium, is the refractive index n of the medium.
In short, whether it is a wave or a particle or a human being, whenever two mediums
and two velocities are involved, one must follow Snell’s law if one wants to take the
shortest time.
9.4 T OTAL I NTERNAL R EFLECTION
When light travels from an optically denser medium to a rarer medium
at the interface, it is partly reflected back into the same medium and
partly refracted to the second medium. This reflection is called the internal
reflection.
When a ray of light enters from a denser medium to a rarer medium,
it bends away from the normal, for example, the ray AO 1 B in Fig. 9.12.
The incident ray AO 1 is partially reflected (O 1 C) and partially transmitted
(O 1 B) or refracted, the angle of refraction (r ) being larger than the angle of
incidence (i ). As the angle of incidence increases, so does the angle of
refraction, till for the ray AO 3 , the angle of refraction is π/2. The refracted
ray is bent so much away from the normal that it grazes the surface at
the interface between the two media. This is shown by the ray AO 3 D in
Fig. 9.12. If the angle of incidence is increased still further (e.g., the ray
AO 4 ), refraction is not possible, and the incident ray is totally reflected.
319Physics
This is called total internal reflection. When
light gets reflected by a surface, normally
some fraction of it gets transmitted. The
reflected ray, therefore, is always less intense
than the incident ray, howsoever smooth the
reflecting surface may be. In total internal
reflection, on the other hand, no
transmission of light takes place.
The angle of incidence corresponding to
an angle of refraction 90o, say ∠AO 3 N, is
called the critical angle (i c ) for the given pair
of media. We see from Snell’s law [Eq. (9.10)]
FIGURE 9.12 Refraction and internal reflection
of rays from a point A in the denser medium
that if the relative refractive index is less
(water) incident at different angles at the interface than one then, since the maximum value
with a rarer medium (air).
of sin r is unity, there is an upper limit
to the value of sin i for which the law can be satisfied, that is, i = i c
such that
sin i c = n 21
(9.12)
For values of i larger than i c , Snell’s law of refraction cannot be
satisfied, and hence no refraction is possible.
The refractive index of denser medium 1 with respect to rarer medium
2 will be n 12 = 1/sin i c . Some typical critical angles are listed in Table 9.1.
T ABLE 9.1 C RITICAL ANGLE OF SOME TRANSPARENT MEDIA WITH RESPECT TO
AIR
Substance medium Refractive index Critical angle
Water 1.33 48.75°
Crown glass 1.52 41.14°
Dense flint glass 1.62 37.31°
Diamond 2.42 24.41°
A demonstration for total internal reflection
320
All optical phenomena can be demonstrated very easily with the use of a
laser torch or pointer, which is easily available nowadays. Take a glass
beaker with clear water in it. Stir the water a few times with a piece of
soap, so that it becomes a little turbid. Take a laser pointer and shine its
beam through the turbid water. You will find that the path of the beam
inside the water shines brightly.
Shine the beam from below the beaker such that it strikes at the
upper water surface at the other end. Do you find that it undergoes partial
reflection (which is seen as a spot on the table below) and partial refraction
[which comes out in the air and is seen as a spot on the roof; Fig. 9.13(a)]?
Now direct the laser beam from one side of the beaker such that it strikes
the upper surface of water more obliquely [Fig. 9.13(b)]. Adjust the
direction of laser beam until you find the angle for which the refractionRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
above the water surface is totally absent and the beam is totally reflected
back to water. This is total internal reflection at its simplest.
Pour this water in a long test tube and shine the laser light from top,
as shown in Fig. 9.13(c). Adjust the direction of the laser beam such that
it is totally internally reflected every time it strikes the walls of the tube.
This is similar to what happens in optical fibres.
Take care not to look into the laser beam directly and not to point it
at anybody’s face.
9.4.1 Total internal reflection in nature and
its technological applications
(i) Mirage: On hot summer days, the air near the ground becomes hotter
than the air at higher levels. The refractive index of air increases with
its density. Hotter air is less dense, and has smaller refractive index
than the cooler air. If the air currents are small, that is, the air is still,
the optical density at different layers of air increases with height. As a
result, light from a tall object such as a tree, passes through a medium
whose refractive index decreases towards the ground. Thus, a ray of
light from such an object successively bends away from the normal
and undergoes total internal reflection, if the angle of incidence for
the air near the ground exceeds the critical angle. This is shown in
Fig. 9.14(b). To a distant observer, the light appears to be coming
FIGURE 9.13
from somewhere below the ground. The observer naturally assumes
Observing total
that light is being reflected from the ground, say, by a pool of water internal reflection in
near the tall object. Such inverted images of distant tall objects cause
water with a laser
an optical illusion to the observer. This phenomenon is called mirage. beam (refraction due
to glass of beaker
This type of mirage is especially common in hot deserts. Some of you
neglected
being very
might have noticed that while moving in a bus or a car during a hot
thin).
summer day, a distant patch of road, especially on a highway, appears
to be wet. But, you do not find any evidence of wetness when you
reach that spot. This is also due to mirage.
FIGURE 9.14 (a) A tree is seen by an observer at its place when the air above the ground is
at uniform temperature, (b) When the layers of air close to the ground have varying
temperature with hottest layers near the ground, light from a distant tree may
undergo total internal reflection, and the apparent image of the tree may create
321
an illusion to the observer that the tree is near a pool of water.Physics
(ii) Diamond: Diamonds are known for their
spectacular brilliance. Their brilliance
is mainly due to the total internal
reflection of light inside them. The critical
angle for diamond-air interface (≅ 24.4°)
is very small, therefore once light enters
a diamond, it is very likely to undergo
total internal reflection inside it.
Diamonds found in nature rarely exhibit
the brilliance for which they are known.
It is the technical skill of a diamond
cutter which makes diamonds to
sparkle so brilliantly. By cutting the
diamond suitably, multiple total
internal reflections can be made
to occur.
(iii) Prism : Prisms designed to bend light by
FIGURE 9.15 Prisms designed to bend rays by
90o or by 180o make use of total internal
90o and 180o or to invert image without changing
reflection [Fig. 9.15(a) and (b)]. Such a
its size make use of total internal reflection.
prism is also used to invert images
without changing their size [Fig. 9.15(c)].
In the first two cases, the critical angle i c for the material of the prism
must be less than 45o. We see from Table 9.1 that this is true for both
crown glass and dense flint glass.
(iv) Optical fibres: Now-a-days optical fibres are extensively used for
transmitting audio and video signals through long distances. Optical
fibres too make use of the phenomenon of total internal reflection.
Optical fibres are fabricated with high quality composite glass/quartz
fibres. Each fibre consists of a core and cladding. The refractive index
of the material of the core is higher than that of the cladding.
When a signal in the form of light is
directed at one end of the fibre at a suitable
angle, it undergoes repeated total internal
reflections along the length of the fibre and
finally comes out at the other end (Fig. 9.16).
Since light undergoes total internal reflection
at each stage, there is no appreciable loss in
the intensity of the light signal. Optical fibres
FIGURE 9.16 Light undergoes successive total
are fabricated such that light reflected at one
internal reflections as it moves through an
side of inner surface strikes the other at an
optical fibre.
angle larger than the critical angle. Even if the
fibre is bent, light can easily travel along its
length. Thus, an optical fibre can be used to act as an optical pipe.
A bundle of optical fibres can be put to several uses. Optical fibres
are extensively used for transmitting and receiving electrical signals which
are converted to light by suitable transducers. Obviously, optical fibres
can also be used for transmission of optical signals. For example, these
are used as a ‘light pipe’ to facilitate visual examination of internal organs
322
like esophagus, stomach and intestines. You might have seen a commonlyRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
available decorative lamp with fine plastic fibres with their free ends
forming a fountain like structure. The other end of the fibres is fixed over
an electric lamp. When the lamp is switched on, the light travels from the
bottom of each fibre and appears at the tip of its free end as a dot of light.
The fibres in such decorative lamps are optical fibres.
The main requirement in fabricating optical fibres is that there should
be very little absorption of light as it travels for long distances inside
them. This has been achieved by purification and special preparation of
materials such as quartz. In silica glass fibres, it is possible to transmit
more than 95% of the light over a fibre length of 1 km. (Compare with
what you expect for a block of ordinary window glass 1 km thick.)
9.5 R EFRACTION AT S PHERICAL S URFACES
AND BY L ENSES
We have so far considered refraction at a plane interface. We shall now
consider refraction at a spherical interface between two transparent media.
An infinitesimal part of a spherical surface can be regarded as planar
and the same laws of refraction can be applied at every point on the
surface. Just as for reflection by a spherical mirror, the normal at the
point of incidence is perpendicular to the tangent plane to the spherical
surface at that point and, therefore, passes through its centre of curvature.
We first consider refraction by a single spherical surface and follow it by
thin lenses. A thin lens is a transparent optical medium bounded by two
surfaces; at least one of which should be spherical. Applying the formula
for image formation by a single spherical surface successively at the two
surfaces of a lens, we shall obtain the lens maker’s formula and then the
lens formula.
9.5.1 Refraction at a spherical surface
Figure 9.17 shows the geometry of formation of image I of an object O on
the principal axis of a spherical surface with centre of curvature C, and
radius of curvature R. The rays are incident from a medium of refractive
index n 1 , to another of refractive index n 2 . As before, we take the aperture
(or the lateral size) of the surface to be small
compared to other distances involved, so that small
angle approximation can be made. In particular,
NM will be taken to be nearly equal to the length of
the perpendicular from the point N on the principal
axis. We have, for small angles,
tan ∠NOM = MN
OM
tan ∠NCM = MN
MC
tan ∠NIM =
MN
MI
FIGURE 9.17 Refraction at a spherical
surface separating two media.
323Physics
L IGHT SOURCES AND PHOTOMETRY
It is known that a body above absolute zero temperature emits electromagnetic radiation.
The wavelength region in which the body emits the radiation depends on its absolute
temperature. Radiation emitted by a hot body, for example, a tungsten filament lamp
having temperature 2850 K are partly invisible and mostly in infrared (or heat) region.
As the temperature of the body increases radiation emitted by it is in visible region. The
sun with temperature of about 5500 K emits radiation whose energy versus wavelength
graph peaks approximately at 550 nm corresponding to green light and is almost in the
middle of the visible region. The energy versus wavelength distribution graph for a given
body peaks at some wavelength, which is inversely proportional to the absolute
temperature of that body.
The measurement of light as perceived by human eye is called photometry. Photometry
is measurement of a physiological phenomenon, being the stimulus of light as received
by the human eye, transmitted by the optic nerves and analysed by the brain. The main
physical quantities in photometry are (i) the luminous intensity of the source,
(ii) the luminous flux or flow of light from the source, and (iii) illuminance of the surface.
The SI unit of luminous intensity (I ) is candela (cd). The candela is the luminous intensity,
in a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency
540 × 10 12 Hz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per steradian.
If a light source emits one candela of luminous intensity into a solid angle of one steradian,
the total luminous flux emitted into that solid angle is one lumen (lm). A standard
100 watt incadescent light bulb emits approximately 1700 lumens.
In photometry, the only parameter, which can be measured directly is illuminance. It
is defined as luminous flux incident per unit area on a surface (lm/m 2 or lux ). Most light
meters measure this quantity. The illuminance E, produced by a source of luminous
intensity I, is given by E = I/r 2 , where r is the normal distance of the surface from the
source. A quantity named luminance (L), is used to characterise the brightness of emitting
or reflecting flat surfaces. Its unit is cd/m 2 (sometimes called ‘nit’ in industry) . A good
LCD computer monitor has a brightness of about 250 nits.
Now, for ∆NOC, i is the exterior angle. Therefore, i = ∠NOM + ∠NCM
i =
MN MN
+
OM MC
(9.13)
Similarly,
r = ∠NCM – ∠NIM
i.e., r =
MN
MN
−
MC
MI
Now, by Snell’s law
n 1 sin i = n 2 sin r
or for small angles
324
n 1 i = n 2 r
(9.14)Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
Substituting i and r from Eqs. (9.13) and (9.14), we get
n 1
OM
+
n 2
MI
=
n 2 − n 1
MC
(9.15)
Here, OM, MI and MC represent magnitudes of distances. Applying the
Cartesian sign convention,
OM = –u, MI = +v, MC = +R
Substituting these in Eq. (9.15), we get
n 2 n 1 n 2 − n 1
−
=
(9.16)
v
u
R
Equation (9.16) gives us a relation between object and image distance
in terms of refractive index of the medium and the radius of
curvature of the curved spherical surface. It holds for any curved
spherical surface.
Example 9.6 Light from a point source in air falls on a spherical
glass surface (n = 1.5 and radius of curvature = 20 cm). The distance
of the light source from the glass surface is 100 cm. At what position
the image is formed?
Solution
We use the relation given by Eq. (9.16). Here
u = – 100 cm, v = ?, R = + 20 cm, n 1 = 1, and n 2 = 1.5.
We then have
or v = +100 cm
The image is formed at a distance of 100 cm from the glass surface,
in the direction of incident light.
E X
1.5
1
0.5
+
=
v 100 20
9.5.2 Refraction by a lens
Figure 9.18(a) shows the geometry of image formation by a double convex
lens. The image formation can be seen in terms of two steps:
(i) The first refracting surface forms the image I 1 of the object O
[Fig. 9.18(b)]. The image I 1 acts as a virtual object for the second surface
that forms the image at I [Fig. 9.18(c)]. Applying Eq. (9.15) to the first
interface ABC, we get
n 1 n 2 n 2 − n 1
+
=
OB BI 1
BC 1
(9.17)
A similar procedure applied to the second interface* ADC gives,
−
n 2 n 1 n 2 − n 1
+
=
DI 1 DI
DC 2
(9.18)
* Note that now the refractive index of the medium on the right side of ADC is n 1
while on its left it is n 2 . Further DI 1 is negative as the distance is measured
against the direction of incident light.
325Physics
For a thin lens, BI 1 = DI 1 . Adding
Eqs. (9.17) and (9.18), we get
 1
n 1 n 1
1 
+
= ( n 2 − n 1 ) 
+
OB DI
 BC 1 DC 2  
(9.19)
Suppose the object is at infinity, i.e.,
OB → ∞ and DI = f, Eq. (9.19) gives
 1
n 1
1 
= ( n 2 − n 1 ) 
+
f
 BC 1 DC 2  
(9.20)
The point where image of an object
placed at infinity is formed is called the
focus F, of the lens and the distance f gives
its focal length. A lens has two foci, F and
F′, on either side of it (Fig. 9.19). By the
sign convention,
BC 1 = + R 1 ,
DC 2 = –R 2
So Eq. (9.20) can be written as
 1
1
1 
= ( n 21 − 1 ) 
−
f
 R 1 R 2  
FIGURE 9.18 (a) The position of object, and the
image formed by a double convex lens,
(b) Refraction at the first spherical surface and
(c) Refraction at the second spherical surface.

n 2 
  n 21 = n  
1
(9.21)
Equation (9.21) is known as the lens
maker’s formula. It is useful to design
lenses of desired focal length using surfaces
of suitable radii of curvature. Note that the
formula is true for a concave lens also. In
that case R 1 is negative, R 2 positive and
therefore, f is negative.
From Eqs. (9.19) and (9.20), we get
n 1 n 1
n
+
= 1
OB DI
f
(9.22)
Again, in the thin lens approximation, B and D are both close to the
optical centre of the lens. Applying the sign convention,
BO = – u, DI = +v, we get
1 1 1
− =
v u f
326
(9.23)
Equation (9.23) is the familiar thin lens formula. Though we derived
it for a real image formed by a convex lens, the formula is valid for both
convex as well as concave lenses and for both real and virtual images.
It is worth mentioning that the two foci, F and F′, of a double convex
or concave lens are equidistant from the optical centre. The focus on the
side of the (original) source of light is called the first focal point, whereas
the other is called the second focal point.
To find the image of an object by a lens, we can, in principle, take any
two rays emanating from a point on an object; trace their paths usingRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
the laws of refraction and find the point where
the refracted rays meet (or appear to meet). In
practice, however, it is convenient to choose any
two of the following rays:
(i) A ray emanating from the object parallel to
the principal axis of the lens after refraction
passes through the second principal focus
F′ (in a convex lens) or appears to diverge (in
a concave lens) from the first principal focus F.
(ii) A ray of light, passing through the optical
centre of the lens, emerges without any
deviation after refraction.
(iii) A ray of light passing through the first
principal focus (for a convex lens) or
appearing to meet at it (for a concave lens)
emerges parallel to the principal axis after
refraction.
Figures 9.19(a) and (b) illustrate these rules
for a convex and a concave lens, respectively.
You should practice drawing similar ray
diagrams for different positions of the object with
respect to the lens and also verify that the lens
FIGURE 9.19 Tracing rays through (a)
formula, Eq. (9.23), holds good for all cases.
convex lens (b) concave lens.
Here again it must be remembered that each
point on an object gives out infinite number of
rays. All these rays will pass through the same image point after refraction
at the lens.
Magnification (m) produced by a lens is defined, like that for a mirror,
as the ratio of the size of the image to that of the object. Proceeding in the
same way as for spherical mirrors, it is easily seen that for a lens
h ′
v
=
(9.24)
h
u
When we apply the sign convention, we see that, for erect (and virtual)
image formed by a convex or concave lens, m is positive, while for an
inverted (and real) image, m is negative.
m =
Example 9.7 A magician during a show makes a glass lens with
n = 1.47 disappear in a trough of liquid. What is the refractive index
of the liquid? Could the liquid be water?
Solution
The refractive index of the liquid must be equal to 1.47 in order to
make the lens disappear. This means n 1 = n 2. . This gives 1/f = 0 or
f → ∞. The lens in the liquid will act like a plane sheet of glass. No,
the liquid is not water. It could be glycerine.
9.5.3 Power of a lens
Power of a lens is a measure of the convergence or divergence, which a
lens introduces in the light falling on it. Clearly, a lens of shorter focal
327Physics
length bends the incident light more, while converging it
in case of a convex lens and diverging it in case of a
concave lens. The power P of a lens is defined as the
tangent of the angle by which it converges or diverges a
beam of light falling at unit distant from the optical centre
(Fig. 9.20).
tan δ =
h
1
; if h = 1 tan δ =
f
f
or δ =
1
for small
f
value of δ . Thus,
FIGURE 9.20 Power of a lens.
P =
1
f
(9.25)
The SI unit for power of a lens is dioptre (D): 1D = 1m –1 . The power of
a lens of focal length of 1 metre is one dioptre. Power of a lens is positive
for a converging lens and negative for a diverging lens. Thus, when an
optician prescribes a corrective lens of power + 2.5 D, the required lens is
a convex lens of focal length + 40 cm. A lens of power of – 4.0 D means a
concave lens of focal length – 25 cm.
Example 9.8 (i) If f = 0.5 m for a glass lens, what is the power of the
lens? (ii) The radii of curvature of the faces of a double convex lens
are 10 cm and 15 cm. Its focal length is 12 cm. What is the refractive
index of glass? (iii) A convex lens has 20 cm focal length in air. What
is focal length in water? (Refractive index of air-water = 1.33, refractive
index for air-glass = 1.5.)
Solution
(i) Power = +2 dioptre.
(ii) Here, we have f = +12 cm, R 1 = +10 cm, R 2 = –15 cm.
Refractive index of air is taken as unity.
We use the lens formula of Eq. (9.22). The sign convention has to
be applied for f, R 1 and R 2 .
Substituting the values, we have
1
1 
 1
= ( n − 1) 
−


12
10 − 15 
This gives n = 1.5.
(iii) For a glass lens in air, n 2 = 1.5, n 1 = 1, f = +20 cm. Hence, the lens
formula gives
 1
1
1 
= 0.5  −

20
 R 1 R 2 
For the same glass lens in water, n 2 = 1.5, n 1 = 1.33. Therefore,
 1
1.33
1 
= (1.5 − 1.33)  −

f
 R 1 R 2 
Combining these two equations, we find f = + 78.2 cm.
(9.26)
9.5.4 Combination of thin lenses in contact
328
Consider two lenses A and B of focal length f 1 and f 2 placed in contact
with each other. Let the object be placed at a point O beyond the focus ofRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
the first lens A (Fig. 9.21). The first lens produces
an image at I 1 . Since image I 1 is real, it serves as a
virtual object for the second lens B, producing the
final image at I. It must, however, be borne in mind
that formation of image by the first lens is presumed
only to facilitate determination of the position of the
final image. In fact, the direction of rays emerging
FIGURE 9.21 Image formation by a
from the first lens gets modified in accordance with
the angle at which they strike the second lens. Since combination of two thin lenses in contact.
the lenses are thin, we assume the optical centres of the lenses to be
coincident. Let this central point be denoted by P.
For the image formed by the first lens A, we get
1 1 1
− =
v 1 u f 1
For the image formed by the second lens B, we get (9.27)
1 1 1
− =
v v 1 f 2
Adding Eqs. (9.27) and (9.28), we get (9.28)
1 1 1
1
− = +
v u f 1
f 2 (9.29)
If the two lens-system is regarded as equivalent to a single lens of
focal length f, we have
1 1 1
− =
v u f
so that we get
1 1
1
= +
f f 1
f 2
(9.30)
The derivation is valid for any number of thin lenses in contact. If
several thin lenses of focal length f 1 , f 2 , f 3 ,... are in contact, the effective
focal length of their combination is given by
1 1
1
1
= +
+
+ ...
f f 1
f 2
f 3
(9.31)
In terms of power, Eq. (9.31) can be written as
P = P 1 + P 2 + P 3 + ...
(9.32)
where P is the net power of the lens combination. Note that the sum in
Eq. (9.32) is an algebraic sum of individual powers, so some of the terms
on the right side may be positive (for convex lenses) and some negative
(for concave lenses). Combination of lenses helps to obtain diverging or
converging lenses of desired magnification. It also enhances sharpness
of the image. Since the image formed by the first lens becomes the object
for the second, Eq. (9.25) implies that the total magnification m of the
combination is a product of magnification (m 1 , m 2 , m 3 ,...) of individual
lenses
m = m 1 m 2 m 3 ...
(9.33)
329Physics
Such a system of combination of lenses is commonly used in designing
lenses for cameras, microscopes, telescopes and other optical instruments.
Example 9.9 Find the position of the image formed by the lens
combination given in the Fig. 9.22.
FIGURE 9.22
Solution Image formed by the first lens
1 1 1
− =
v 1 u 1 f 1
1
1
1
−
=
v 1 − 30 10
or v 1 = 15 cm
The image formed by the first lens serves as the object for the second.
This is at a distance of (15 – 5) cm = 10 cm to the right of the second
lens. Though the image is real, it serves as a virtual object for the
second lens, which means that the rays appear to come from it for
the second lens.
1
1
1
−
=
v 2 10 − 10
or v 2 = ∞
The virtual image is formed at an infinite distance to the left of the
second lens. This acts as an object for the third lens.
1 1
1
−
=
v 3 u 3
f 3
or 1 1
1
= +
v 3 ∞ 30
or v 3 = 30 cm
The final image is formed 30 cm to the right of the third lens.
9.6 R EFRACTION
330
THROUGH A
P RISM
Figure 9.23 shows the passage of light through a triangular prism ABC.
The angles of incidence and refraction at the first face AB are i and r 1 ,
while the angle of incidence (from glass to air) at the second face AC is r 2
and the angle of refraction or emergence e. The angle between the
emergent ray RS and the direction of the incident ray PQ is called the
angle of deviation, δ .Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
In the quadrilateral AQNR, two of the angles
(at the vertices Q and R) are right angles.
Therefore, the sum of the other angles of the
quadrilateral is 180o.
∠A + ∠QNR = 180o
From the triangle QNR,
r 1 + r 2 + ∠QNR = 180o
Comparing these two equations, we get
r 1 + r 2 = A
(9.34)
The total deviation δ is the sum of deviations
at the two faces,
FIGURE 9.23 A ray of light passing through
a triangular glass prism.
δ = (i – r 1 ) + (e – r 2 )
that is,
δ = i + e – A
(9.35)
Thus, the angle of deviation depends on the angle of incidence. A plot
between the angle of deviation and angle of incidence is shown in
Fig. 9.24. You can see that, in general, any given value of δ, except for
i = e, corresponds to two values i and hence of e. This, in fact, is expected
from the symmetry of i and e in Eq. (9.35), i.e., δ remains the same if i
and e are interchanged. Physically, this is related
to the fact that the path of ray in Fig. 9.23 can be
traced back, resulting in the same angle of
deviation. At the minimum deviation D m , the
refracted ray inside the prism becomes parallel
to its base. We have
δ = D m , i = e which implies r 1 = r 2 .
Equation (9.34) gives
A
2
In the same way, Eq. (9.35) gives
2r = A or r = (9.36)
D m = 2i – A, or i = (A + D m )/2 (9.37)
The refractive index of the prism is
n 21 =
n 2 sin[( A + D m )/ 2]
=
n 1
sin[ A /2]
(9.38)
FIGURE 9.24 Plot of angle of deviation ( δ )
versus angle of incidence (i ) for a
triangular prism.
The angles A and D m can be measured
experimentally. Equation (9.38) thus provides a
method of determining refractive index of the material of the prism.
For a small angle prism, i.e., a thin prism, D m is also very small, and
we get
n 21 =
sin [( A + D m )/2]
sin[ A /2]
( A + D m ) /2
A /2
D m = (n 21 –1)A
It implies that, thin prisms do not deviate light much.
331Physics
9.7 D ISPERSION
BY A
P RISM
It has been known for a long time that when a narrow beam of sunlight,
usually called white light, is incident on a glass prism, the emergent
light is seen to be consisting of several colours. There is actually a
continuous variation of colour, but broadly, the different component
colours that appear in sequence are:
violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange
and red (given by the acronym
VIBGYOR). The red light bends the
least, while the violet light bends the most
(Fig. 9.25).
The phenomenon of splitting of light
into its component colours is known as
dispersion. The pattern of colour
components of light is called the spectrum
of light. The word spectrum is now used
in a much more general sense: we
discussed in Chapter 8 the electro-
FIGURE 9.25 Dispersion of sunlight or white light
magnetic spectrum over the large range
on passing through a glass prism. The relative
of wavelengths, from γ -rays to radio
deviation of different colours shown is highly
waves, of which the spectrum of light
exaggerated.
(visible spectrum) is only a small part.
Though the reason for appearance of
spectrum is now common knowledge, it was a matter of much debate in
the history of physics. Does the prism itself create colour in some way or
does it only separate the colours already present in white light?
In a classic experiment known for its simplicity but great significance,
Isaac Newton settled the issue once for all. He put another similar prism,
but in an inverted position, and let the emergent beam from the first
prism fall on the second prism (Fig. 9.26). The resulting emergent beam
was found to be white light. The explanation was clear— the first prism
splits the white light into its component colours, while the inverted prism
recombines them to give white light. Thus, white
light itself consists of light of different colours,
which are separated by the prism.
It must be understood here that a ray of light,
as defined mathematically, does not exist. An
actual ray is really a beam of many rays of light.
Each ray splits into component colours when it
enters the glass prism. When those coloured rays
come out on the other side, they again produce a
white beam.
FIGURE 9.26 Schematic diagram of
We now know that colour is associated with
Newton’s classic experiment on
wavelength of light. In the visible spectrum, red
dispersion of white light.
light is at the long wavelength end (~700 nm) while
the violet light is at the short wavelength end
(~ 400 nm). Dispersion takes place because the refractive index of medium
332
for different wavelengths (colours) is different. For example, the bendingRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
of red component of white light is least while it is most for the violet.
Equivalently, red light travels faster than violet light in a glass prism.
Table 9.2 gives the refractive indices for different wavelength for crown
glass and flint glass. Thick lenses could be assumed as made of many
prisms, therefore, thick lenses show chromatic aberration due to
dispersion of light.
T ABLE 9.2 R EFRACTIVE INDICES FOR DIFFERENT WAVELENGTHS
Colour Wavelength (nm) Crown glass Flint glass
Violet 396.9 1.533 1.663
Blue 486.1 1.523 1.639
Yellow 589.3 1.517 1.627
Red 656.3 1.515 1.622
The variation of refractive index with wavelength may be more
pronounced in some media than the other. In vacuum, of course, the
speed of light is independent of wavelength. Thus, vacuum (or air
approximately) is a non-dispersive medium in which all colours travel
with the same speed. This also follows from the fact that sunlight reaches
us in the form of white light and not as its components. On the other
hand, glass is a dispersive medium.
9.8 S OME N ATURAL P HENOMENA
DUE TO
S UNLIGHT
The rainbow is an example of the dispersion of sunlight by the water
drops in the atmosphere. This is a phenomenon due to combined effect
of dispersion, refraction and reflection of sunlight by spherical water
droplets of rain. The conditions for observing a rainbow are that the sun
should be shining in one part of the sky (say near western horizon) while
it is raining in the opposite part of the sky (say eastern horizon).
An observer can therefore see a rainbow only when his back is towards
the sun.
In order to understand the formation of rainbows, consider
Fig. (9.27(a). Sunlight is first refracted as it enters a raindrop, which
causes the different wavelengths (colours) of white light to separate.
Longer wangelength of light (red) are bent the least while the shorter
wavelength (violet) are bent the most. Next, these component rays strike
ti
9.8.1 The rainbow
://
tt
The interplay of light with things around us gives rise to several beautiful
phenomena. The spectacle of colour that we see around us all the time is
possible only due to sunlight. The blue of the sky, white clouds, the red-
hue at sunrise and sunset, the rainbow, the brilliant colours of some
pearls, shells, and wings of birds, are just a few of the natural wonders
we are used to. We describe some of them here from the point of view
of physics.
333Physics
FIGURE 9.27 Rainbow: (a) The sun rays incident on a water drop get refracted twice
and reflected internally by a drop; (b) Enlarge view of internal reflection and
refraction of a ray of light inside a drop form primary rainbow; and
(c) secondary rainbow is formed by rays
undergoing internal reflection twice
inside the drop.
334
the inner surface of the water drop and get internally reflected if the angle
between the refracted ray and normal to the drop surface is greater then
the critical angle (48o, in this case). The reflected light is refracted again
as it comes out of the drop as shown in the figure. It is found that the
violet light emerges at an angle of 40o related to the incoming sunlight
and red light emerges at an angle of 42o. For other colours, angles lie in
between these two values.Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
Figure 9.27(b) explains the formation of primary rainbow. We see
that red light from drop 1 and violet light from drop 2 reach the observers
eye. The violet from drop 1 and red light from drop 2 are directed at level
above or below the observer. Thus the observer sees a rainbow with
red colour on the top and violet on the bottom. Thus, the primary
rainbow is a result of three-step process, that is, refraction, reflection
and refraction.
When light rays undergoes two internal reflections inside a raindrop,
instead of one as in the primary rainbow, a secondary rainbow is formed
as shown in Fig. 9.27(c). It is due to four-step process. The intensity of
light is reduced at the second reflection and hence the secondary rainbow
is fainter than the primary rainbow. Further, the order of the colours is
reversed in it as is clear from Fig. 9.27(c).
9.8.2 Scattering of light
As sunlight travels through the earth’s atmosphere, it gets scattered
(changes its direction) by the atmospheric particles. Light of shorter
wavelengths is scattered much more than light of longer wavelengths.
(The amount of scattering is inversely proportional to the fourth power
of the wavelength. This is known as Rayleigh scattering). Hence, the bluish
colour predominates in a clear sky, since blue has a shorter wave-
length than red and is scattered much more strongly. In fact, violet
gets scattered even more than blue, having a shorter wavelength.
But since our eyes are more sensitive to blue than violet, we see the
sky blue.
Large particles like dust and water
droplets present in the atmosphere
behave differently. The relevant quantity
here is the relative size of the wavelength
of light λ , and the scatterer (of typical size,
say, a). For a << λ , one has Rayleigh
scattering which is proportional to 1/ λ 4 .
For a >> λ , i.e., large scattering objects
(for example, raindrops, large dust or ice
particles) this is not true; all wavelengths
are scattered nearly equally. Thus, clouds
FIGURE 9.28 Sunlight travels through a longer
which have droplets of water with a >> λ
distance in the atmosphere at sunset and sunrise.
are generally white.
At sunset or sunrise, the sun’s rays
have to pass through a larger distance in the atmosphere (Fig. 9.28).
Most of the blue and other shorter wavelengths are removed by scattering.
The least scattered light reaching our eyes, therefore, the sun looks
reddish. This explains the reddish appearance of the sun and full moon
near the horizon.
9.9 O PTICAL I NSTRUMENTS
A number of optical devices and instruments have been designed utilising
reflecting and refracting properties of mirrors, lenses and prisms.
Periscope, kaleidoscope, binoculars, telescopes, microscopes are some
335Physics
examples of optical devices and instruments that are in common use.
Our eye is, of course, one of the most important optical device the nature
has endowed us with. Starting with the eye, we then go on to describe
the principles of working of the microscope and the telescope.
9.9.1 The eye
336
Figure 9.29 (a) shows the eye. Light enters the eye through a curved
front surface, the cornea. It passes through the pupil which is the central
hole in the iris. The size of the pupil can change under control of muscles.
The light is further focussed by the eye lens on the retina. The retina is a
film of nerve fibres covering the curved back surface of the eye. The retina
contains rods and cones which sense light intensity and colour,
respectively, and transmit electrical signals via the optic nerve to the brain
which finally processes this information. The shape (curvature) and
therefore the focal length of the lens can be modified somewhat by the
ciliary muscles. For example, when the muscle is relaxed, the focal length
is about 2.5 cm and objects at infinity are in sharp focus on the retina.
When the object is brought closer to the eye, in order to maintain the
same image-lens distance (≅ 2.5 cm), the focal length of the eye lens
becomes shorter by the action of the ciliary muscles. This property of the
eye is called accommodation. If the object is too close to the eye, the lens
cannot curve enough to focus the image on to the retina, and the image
is blurred. The closest distance for which the lens can focus light on the
retina is called the least distance of distinct vision, or the near point.
The standard value for normal vision is taken as 25 cm. (Often the near
point is given the symbol D.) This distance increases with age, because
of the decreasing effectiveness of the ciliary muscle and the loss of
flexibility of the lens. The near point may be as close as about 7 to 8 cm
in a child ten years of age, and may increase to as much as 200 cm at 60
years of age. Thus, if an elderly person tries to read a book at about 25 cm
from the eye, the image appears blurred. This condition (defect of the eye)
is called presbyopia. It is corrected by using a converging lens for reading.
Thus, our eyes are marvellous organs that have the capability to
interpret incoming electromagnetic waves as images through a complex
process. These are our greatest assets and we must take proper care to
protect them. Imagine the world without a pair of functional eyes. Yet
many amongst us bravely face this challenge by effectively overcoming
their limitations to lead a normal life. They deserve our appreciation for
their courage and conviction.
In spite of all precautions and proactive action, our eyes may develop
some defects due to various reasons. We shall restrict our discussion to
some common optical defects of the eye. For example, the light from a
distant object arriving at the eye-lens may get converged at a point in
front of the retina. This type of defect is called nearsightedness or myopia .
This means that the eye is producing too much convergence in the incident
beam. To compensate this, we interpose a concave lens between the eye
and the object, with the diverging effect desired to get the image focussed
on the retina [Fig. 9.29(b)].Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
FIGURE 9.29 (a) The structure of the eye; (b) shortsighted or myopic eye and its correction;
(c) farsighted or hypermetropic eye and its correction; and (d) astigmatic eye and its correction.
Similarly, if the eye-lens focusses the incoming light at a point behind
the retina, a convergent lens is needed to compensate for the defect in vision.
This defect is called farsightedness or hypermetropia [Fig. 9.29(c)].
Another common defect of vision is called astigmatism. This occurs
when the cornea is not spherical in shape. For example, the cornea could
have a larger curvature in the vertical plane than in the horizontal plane
or vice-versa. If a person with such a defect in eye-lens looks at a wire
mesh or a grid of lines, focussing in either the vertical or the horizontal
plane may not be as sharp as in the other plane. Astigmatism results in
lines in one direction being well focussed while those in a perpendicular
direction may appear distorted [Fig. 9.29(d)]. Astigmatism can be
corrected by using a cylindrical lens of desired radius of curvature with
an appropriately directed axis. This defect can occur along with myopia
or hypermetropia.
Example 9.10 What focal length should the reading spectacles have
for a person for whom the least distance of distinct vision is 50 cm?
1
1
1
1
=
−
=
f
–50
– 25 50
orf = + 50 cm (convex lens).
or
Solution The distance of normal vision is 25 cm. So if a book is at
u = –25 cm, its image should be formed at v = –50 cm. Therefore, the
desired focal length is given by
1
1 1
= −
f
v u
337Physics
Example 9.11
(a) The far point of a myopic person is 80 cm in front of the eye. What
is the power of the lens required to enable him to see very distant
objects clearly?
(b) In what way does the corrective lens help the above person? Does
the lens magnify very distant objects? Explain carefully.
(c) The above person prefers to remove his spectacles while reading
a book. Explain why?
Solution
(a) Solving as in the previous example, we find that the person should
use a concave lens of focal length = – 80 cm, i.e., of power = – 1.25
dioptres.
(b) No. The concave lens, in fact, reduces the size of the object, but
the angle subtended by the distant object at the eye is the same
as the angle subtended by the image (at the far point) at the eye.
The eye is able to see distant objects not because the corrective
lens magnifies the object, but because it brings the object (i.e., it
produces virtual image of the object) at the far point of the eye
which then can be focussed by the eye-lens on the retina.
(c) The myopic person may have a normal near point, i.e., about
25 cm (or even less). In order to read a book with the spectacles,
such a person must keep the book at a distance greater than
25 cm so that the image of the book by the concave lens is produced
not closer than 25 cm. The angular size of the book (or its image)
at the greater distance is evidently less than the angular size
when the book is placed at 25 cm and no spectacles are needed.
Hence, the person prefers to remove the spectacles while reading.
338
Example 9.12 (a) The near point of a hypermetropic person is 75 cm
from the eye. What is the power of the lens required to enable the
person to read clearly a book held at 25 cm from the eye? (b) In what
way does the corrective lens help the above person? Does the lens
magnify objects held near the eye? (c) The above person prefers to
remove the spectacles while looking at the sky. Explain why?
Solution
(a) u = – 25 cm, v = – 75 cm
1/f = 1/25 – 1/75, i.e., f = 37.5 cm.
The corrective lens needs to have a converging power of +2.67
dioptres.
(b) The corrective lens produces a virtual image (at 75 cm) of an object
at 25 cm. The angular size of this image is the same as that of the
object. In this sense the lens does not magnify the object but merely
brings the object to the near point of the hypermetric eye, which
then gets focussed on the retina. However, the angular size is
greater than that of the same object at the near point (75 cm)
viewed without the spectacles.
(c) A hypermetropic eye may have normal far point i.e., it may have
enough converging power to focus parallel rays from infinity on
the retina of the shortened eyeball. Wearing spectacles of converging
lenses (used for near vision) will amount to more converging power
than needed for parallel rays. Hence the person prefers not to use
the spectacles for far objects.Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
9.9.2 The microscope
A simple magnifier or microscope is a converging lens of small focal length
(Fig. 9.30). In order to use such a lens as a microscope, the lens is held
near the object, one focal length away or less, and
the eye is positioned close to the lens on the other
side. The idea is to get an erect, magnified and
virtual image of the object at a distance so that it
can be viewed comfortably, i.e., at 25 cm or more.
If the object is at a distance f, the image is at
infinity. However, if the object is at a distance
slightly less than the focal length of the lens, the
image is virtual and closer than infinity. Although
the closest comfortable distance for viewing the
image is when it is at the near point (distance
D ≅ 25 cm), it causes some strain on the eye.
Therefore, the image formed at infinity is often
considered most suitable for viewing by the relaxed
eye. We show both cases, the first in Fig. 9.30(a),
and the second in Fig. 9.30(b) and (c).
The linear magnification m , for the image
formed at the near point D, by a simple microscope
can be obtained by using the relation
m =
 1 1  
v
v 
= v  –  =  1– 
u
 v f  
f 
Now according to our sign convention, v is
negative, and is equal in magnitude to D. Thus,
the magnification is

D 
m =  1 + 
(9.39)

f 
Since D is about 25 cm, to have a magnification of
six, one needs a convex lens of focal length,
FIGURE 9.30 A simple microscope; (a) the
f = 5 cm.
magnifying lens is located such that the
Note that m = h ′ /h where h is the size of the
image is at the near point, (b) the angle
object and h′ the size of the image. This is also the
subtanded by the object, is the same as
ratio of the angle subtended by the image
that at the near point, and (c) the object
to that subtended by the object, if placed at D for
near the focal point of the lens; the image
comfortable viewing. (Note that this is not the angle
is far off but closer than infinity.
actually subtended by the object at the eye, which
is h/u.) What a single-lens simple magnifier
achieves is that it allows the object to be brought closer to the eye than D.
We will now find the magnification when the image is at infinity. In
this case we will have to obtained the angular magnification. Suppose
the object has a height h. The maximum angle it can subtend, and be
clearly visible (without a lens), is when it is at the near point, i.e., a distance
D. The angle subtended is then given by
 h 
tan θ o =   ≈ θ o
 D 
(9.40)
339Physics
We now find the angle subtended at the eye by the image when the
object is at u. From the relations
h ′
v
= m =
h
u
we have the angle subtended by the image
h ′
h v
h
≈θ . The angle subtended by the object, when it
=
⋅ =
− v − v u − u
is at u = –f.
tan θ i =
 h 
θ i =  
 f 
(9.41)
as is clear from Fig. 9.29(c). The angular magnification is, therefore
 θ  D
m =  i  =
f
 θ o 
(9.42)
This is one less than the magnification when the image is at the near
point, Eq. (9.39), but the viewing is more comfortable and the difference
in magnification is usually small. In subsequent discussions of optical
instruments (microscope and telescope) we shall assume the image to be
at infinity.
A simple microscope has a limited maximum magnification (≤ 9) for
realistic focal lengths. For much larger magnifications, one uses two
lenses, one compounding the effect of the other. This is known as a
compound microscope. A schematic diagram of
a compound microscope is shown in Fig. 9.31.
The lens nearest the object, called the objective,
forms a real, inverted, magnified image of the
object. This serves as the object for the second
lens, the eyepiece, which functions essentially
like a simple microscope or magnifier, produces
the final image, which is enlarged and virtual.
The first inverted image is thus near (at or
within) the focal plane of the eyepiece, at a
distance appropriate for final image formation
at infinity, or a little closer for image formation
at the near point. Clearly, the final image is
inverted with respect to the original object.
We now obtain the magnification due to a
FIGURE 9.31 Ray diagram for the
compound microscope. The ray diagram of
formation of image by a compound
Fig. 9.31 shows that the (linear) magnification
microscope.
due to the objective, namely h′/h, equals
h ′
L
=
h
f o
where we have used the result
m O =
340
 h   h ′ 
tan β =   =  
 f o   L 
(9.43)Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
Here h′ is the size of the first image, the object size being h and f o
being the focal length of the objective. The first image is formed near the
focal point of the eyepiece. The distance L, i.e., the distance between the
second focal point of the objective and the first focal point of the eyepiece
(focal length f e ) is called the tube length of the compound microscope.
As the first inverted image is near the focal point of the eyepiece, we
use the result from the discussion above for the simple microscope to
obtain the (angular) magnification m e due to it [Eq. (9.39)], when the
final image is formed at the near point, is

D 
m e =  1 +
[9.44(a)]
f e  

When the final image is formed at infinity, the angular magnification
due to the eyepiece [Eq. (9.42)] is
m e = (D/f e )
[9.44(b)]
Thus, the total magnification [(according to Eq. (9.33)], when the
image is formed at infinity, is
20 25
×
= 250
1
2
Various other factors such as illumination of the object, contribute to
the quality and visibility of the image. In modern microscopes, multi-
component lenses are used for both the objective and the eyepiece to
improve image quality by minimising various optical aberrations (defects)
in lenses.
=
es
 L   D 
m = m o m e =    
 f o   f e 
ge
 L   D 
m = m o m e =    
(9.45)
 f o   f e 
Clearly, to achieve a large magnification of a small object (hence the
name microscope), the objective and eyepiece should have small focal
lengths. In practice, it is difficult to make the focal length much smaller
than 1 cm. Also large lenses are required to make L large.
For example, with an objective with f o = 1.0 cm, and an eyepiece with
focal length f e = 2.0 cm, and a tube length of 20 cm, the magnification is
9.9.3 Telescope
The telescope is used to provide angular magnification of distant objects
(Fig. 9.32). It also has an objective and an eyepiece. But here, the objective
has a large focal length and a much larger aperture than the eyepiece.
Light from a distant object enters the objective and a real image is formed
in the tube at its second focal point. The eyepiece magnifies this image
producing a final inverted image. The magnifying power m is the ratio of
the angle β subtended at the eye by the final image to the angle α which
the object subtends at the lens or the eye. Hence
β
h f o
f
m ≈
≈
.
= o
(9.46)
α
f e h
f e
In this case, the length of the telescope tube is f o + f e .
341Physics
Terrestrial telescopes have, in
addition, a pair of inverting lenses to
make the final image erect. Refracting
telescopes can be used both for
terrestrial and astronomical
observations. For example, consider
a telescope whose objective has a focal
length of 100 cm and the eyepiece a
focal length of 1 cm. The magnifying
power of this telescope is
m = 100/1 = 100.
Let us consider a pair of stars of
actual separation 1′ (one minute of
arc). The stars appear as though they
FIGURE 9.32 A refracting telescope.
are separated by an angle of 100 × 1′
= 100′ =1.67o.
The main considerations with an astronomical telescope are its light
gathering power and its resolution or resolving power. The former clearly
depends on the area of the objective. With larger diameters, fainter objects
can be observed. The resolving power, or the ability to observe two objects
distinctly, which are in very nearly the same direction, also depends on
the diameter of the objective. So, the desirable aim in optical telescopes
is to make them with objective of large diameter. The largest lens objective
in use has a diameter of 40 inch (~1.02 m). It is at the Yerkes Observatory
in Wisconsin, USA. Such big lenses tend to be very heavy and therefore,
difficult to make and support by their edges. Further, it is rather difficult
and expensive to make such large sized lenses which form images that
are free from any kind of chromatic aberration and distortions.
For these reasons, modern telescopes use a concave mirror rather
than a lens for the objective. Telescopes with mirror objectives are called
reflecting telescopes. They have several advantages. First, there is no
chromatic aberration in a mirror. Second, if a parabolic reflecting surface
is chosen, spherical aberration is also removed. Mechanical support is
much less of a problem since a mirror weighs much less than a lens of
equivalent optical quality, and can be
supported over its entire back surface, not
just over its rim. One obvious problem with a
reflecting telescope is that the objective mirror
focusses light inside the telescope tube. One
must have an eyepiece and the observer right
there, obstructing some light (depending on
the size of the observer cage). This is what is
done in the very large 200 inch (~5.08 m)
diameters, Mt. Palomar telescope, California.
The viewer sits near the focal point of the
FIGURE 9.33 Schematic diagram of a reflecting mirror, in a small cage. Another solution to
telescope (Cassegrain).
the problem is to deflect the light being
focussed by another mirror. One such
arrangement using a convex secondary mirror to focus the incident light,
342
which now passes through a hole in the objective primary mirror, is shownRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
in Fig. 9.33. This is known as a Cassegrain telescope, after its inventor.
It has the advantages of a large focal length in a short telescope. The
largest telescope in India is in Kavalur, Tamil Nadu. It is a 2.34 m diameter
reflecting telescope (Cassegrain). It was ground, polished, set up, and is
being used by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore. The largest
reflecting telescopes in the world are the pair of Keck telescopes in Hawaii,
USA, with a reflector of 10 metre in diameter.
SUMMARY
1.
2.
3.
4.
Reflection is governed by the equation ∠i = ∠r ′ and refraction by the
Snell’s law, sini/sinr = n, where the incident ray, reflected ray, refracted
ray and normal lie in the same plane. Angles of incidence, reflection
and refraction are i, r ′ and r, respectively.
The critical angle of incidence i c for a ray incident from a denser to rarer
medium, is that angle for which the angle of refraction is 90°. For
i > i c , total internal reflection occurs. Multiple internal reflections in
diamond (i c ≅ 24.4°), totally reflecting prisms and mirage, are some
examples of total internal reflection. Optical fibres consist of glass
fibres coated with a thin layer of material of lower refractive index.
Light incident at an angle at one end comes out at the other, after
multiple internal reflections, even if the fibre is bent.
Cartesian sign convention: Distances measured in the same direction
as the incident light are positive; those measured in the opposite
direction are negative. All distances are measured from the pole/optic
centre of the mirror/lens on the principal axis. The heights measured
upwards above x-axis and normal to the principal axis of the mirror/
lens are taken as positive. The heights measured downwards are taken
as negative.
Mirror equation:
1 1 1
+ =
v u
f
5.
where u and v are object and image distances, respectively and f is the
focal length of the mirror. f is (approximately) half the radius of
curvature R. f is negative for concave mirror; f is positive for a convex
mirror.
For a prism of the angle A, of refractive index n 2 placed in a medium
of refractive index n 1 ,
n 21 =
6.
n 2 sin   ( A + D m ) / 2  
=
n 1
sin ( A / 2 )
where D m is the angle of minimum deviation.
For refraction through a spherical interface (from medium 1 to 2 of
refractive index n 1 and n 2 , respectively)
n 2 n 1 n 2 − n 1
−
=
v
u
R
Thin lens formula
1 1 1
− =
v u
f
343Physics
Lens maker’s formula
1 ( n 2 − n 1 )  1
1 
=
  R − R  
f
n 1
1
2
R 1 and R 2 are the radii of curvature of the lens surfaces. f is positive
for a converging lens; f is negative for a diverging lens. The power of a
lens P = 1/f.
The SI unit for power of a lens is dioptre (D): 1 D = 1 m –1 .
If several thin lenses of focal length f 1 , f 2 , f 3 ,.. are in contact, the
effective focal length of their combination, is given by
1 1
1
1
= +
+
+ ...
f f 1
f 2
f 3
7.
8.
9.
The total power of a combination of several lenses is
P = P 1 + P 2 + P 3 + ...
Dispersion is the splitting of light into its constituent colours.
The Eye : The eye has a convex lens of focal length about 2.5 cm. This
focal length can be varied somewhat so that the image is always formed
on the retina. This ability of the eye is called accommodation. In a
defective eye, if the image is focussed before the retina (myopia), a
diverging corrective lens is needed; if the image is focussed beyond the
retina (hypermetropia), a converging corrective lens is needed.
Astigmatism is corrected by using cylindrical lenses.
Magnifying power m of a simple microscope is given by m = 1 + (D/f ),
where D = 25 cm is the least distance of distinct vision and f is the
focal length of the convex lens. If the image is at infinity, m = D/f. For
a compound microscope, the magnifying power is given by
m = m e × m 0 where m e = 1 + (D/f e ), is the magnification due to the
eyepiece and m o is the magnification produced by the objective.
Approximately,
m =
L
D
×
f o f e
where f o and f e are the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece,
respectively, and L is the distance between their focal points.
10. Magnifying power m of a telescope is the ratio of the angle β subtended
at the eye by the image to the angle α subtended at the eye by the
object.
m =
β
f
= o
α
f e
where f 0 and f e are the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece,
respectively.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
2.
344
The laws of reflection and refraction are true for all surfaces and
pairs of media at the point of the incidence.
The real image of an object placed between f and 2f from a convex lens
can be seen on a screen placed at the image location. If the screen is
removed, is the image still there? This question puzzles many, because
it is difficult to reconcile ourselves with an image suspended in airRay Optics and
Optical Instruments
3.
4.
5.
without a screen. But the image does exist. Rays from a given point
on the object are converging to an image point in space and diverging
away. The screen simply diffuses these rays, some of which reach our
eye and we see the image. This can be seen by the images formed in air
during a laser show.
Image formation needs regular reflection/refraction. In principle, all
rays from a given point should reach the same image point. This is
why you do not see your image by an irregular reflecting object, say
the page of a book.
Thick lenses give coloured images due to dispersion. The variety in
colour of objects we see around us is due to the constituent colours of
the light incident on them. A monochromatic light may produce an
entirely different perception about the colours on an object as seen in
white light.
For a simple microscope, the angular size of the object equals the
angular size of the image. Yet it offers magnification because we can
keep the small object much closer to the eye than 25 cm and hence
have it subtend a large angle. The image is at 25 cm which we can see.
Without the microscope, you would need to keep the small object at
25 cm which would subtend a very small angle.
EXERCISES
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
A small candle, 2.5 cm in size is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave
mirror of radius of curvature 36 cm. At what distance from the mirror
should a screen be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Describe
the nature and size of the image. If the candle is moved closer to the
mirror, how would the screen have to be moved?
A 4.5 cm needle is placed 12 cm away from a convex mirror of focal
length 15 cm. Give the location of the image and the magnification.
Describe what happens as the needle is moved farther from the mirror.
A tank is filled with water to a height of 12.5 cm. The apparent
depth of a needle lying at the bottom of the tank is measured by a
microscope to be 9.4 cm. What is the refractive index of water? If
water is replaced by a liquid of refractive index 1.63 up to the same
height, by what distance would the microscope have to be moved to
focus on the needle again?
Figures 9.34(a) and (b) show refraction of a ray in air incident at 60°
with the normal to a glass-air and water-air interface, respectively.
Predict the angle of refraction in glass when the angle of incidence
in water is 45o with the normal to a water-glass interface [Fig. 9.34(c)].
FIGURE 9.34
345Physics
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
9.10
9.11
9.12
9.13
9.14
9.15
346
A small bulb is placed at the bottom of a tank containing water to a
depth of 80 cm. What is the area of the surface of water through
which light from the bulb can emerge out? Refractive index of water
is 1.33. (Consider the bulb to be a point source.)
A prism is made of glass of unknown refractive index. A parallel
beam of light is incident on a face of the prism. The angle of minimum
deviation is measured to be 40°. What is the refractive index of the
material of the prism? The refracting angle of the prism is 60°. If
the prism is placed in water (refractive index 1.33), predict the new
angle of minimum deviation of a parallel beam of light.
Double-convex lenses are to be manufactured from a glass of
refractive index 1.55, with both faces of the same radius of
curvature. What is the radius of curvature required if the focal length
is to be 20 cm?
A beam of light converges at a point P. Now a lens is placed in the
path of the convergent beam 12 cm from P. At what point does the
beam converge if the lens is (a) a convex lens of focal length 20 cm,
and (b) a concave lens of focal length 16 cm?
An object of size 3.0 cm is placed 14cm in front of a concave lens of
focal length 21 cm. Describe the image produced by the lens. What
happens if the object is moved further away from the lens?
What is the focal length of a convex lens of focal length 30 cm in
contact with a concave lens of focal length 20 cm? Is the system a
converging or a diverging lens? Ignore thickness of the lenses.
A compound microscope consists of an objective lens of focal length
2.0 cm and an eyepiece of focal length 6.25 cm separated by a
distance of 15 cm. How far from the objective should an object be
placed in order to obtain the final image at (a) the least distance of
distinct vision (25 cm), and (b) at infinity? What is the magnifying
power of the microscope in each case?
A person with a normal near point (25 cm) using a compound
microscope with objective of focal length 8.0 mm and an eyepiece of
focal length 2.5 cm can bring an object placed at 9.0 mm from the
objective in sharp focus. What is the separation between the two
lenses? Calculate the magnifying power of the microscope,
A small telescope has an objective lens of focal length 144 cm and
an eyepiece of focal length 6.0 cm. What is the magnifying power of
the telescope? What is the separation between the objective and
the eyepiece?
(a) A giant refracting telescope at an observatory has an objective
lens of focal length 15 m. If an eyepiece of focal length 1.0 cm is
used, what is the angular magnification of the telescope?
(b) If this telescope is used to view the moon, what is the diameter
of the image of the moon formed by the objective lens? The
diameter of the moon is 3.48 × 10 6 m, and the radius of lunar
orbit is 3.8 × 10 8 m.
Use the mirror equation to deduce that:
(a) an object placed between f and 2 f of a concave mirror produces
a real image beyond 2 f.
(b) a convex mirror always produces a virtual image independent
of the location of the object.
(c) the virtual image produced by a convex mirror is always
diminished in size and is located between the focus and
the pole.Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
9.16
9.17
(d) an object placed between the pole and focus of a concave mirror
produces a virtual and enlarged image.
[Note: This exercise helps you deduce algebraically properties of
images that one obtains from explicit ray diagrams.]
A small pin fixed on a table top is viewed from above from a distance
of 50 cm. By what distance would the pin appear to be raised if it is
viewed from the same point through a 15 cm thick glass slab held
parallel to the table? Refractive index of glass = 1.5. Does the answer
depend on the location of the slab?
(a) Figure 9.35 shows a cross-section of a ‘light pipe’ made of a
glass fibre of refractive index 1.68. The outer covering of the
pipe is made of a material of refractive index 1.44. What is the
range of the angles of the incident rays with the axis of the pipe
for which total reflections inside the pipe take place, as shown
in the figure.
(b) What is the answer if there is no outer covering of the pipe?
FIGURE 9.35
9.18
9.19
9.20
9.21
Answer the following questions:
(a) You have learnt that plane and convex mirrors produce virtual
images of objects. Can they produce real images under some
circumstances? Explain.
(b) A virtual image, we always say, cannot be caught on a screen.
Yet when we ‘see’ a virtual image, we are obviously bringing it
on to the ‘screen’ (i.e., the retina) of our eye. Is there a
contradiction?
(c) A diver under water, looks obliquely at a fisherman standing on
the bank of a lake. Would the fisherman look taller or shorter to
the diver than what he actually is?
(d) Does the apparent depth of a tank of water change if viewed
obliquely? If so, does the apparent depth increase or decrease?
(e) The refractive index of diamond is much greater than that of
ordinary glass. Is this fact of some use to a diamond cutter?
The image of a small electric bulb fixed on the wall of a room is to be
obtained on the opposite wall 3 m away by means of a large convex
lens. What is the maximum possible focal length of the lens required
for the purpose?
A screen is placed 90 cm from an object. The image of the object on
the screen is formed by a convex lens at two different locations
separated by 20 cm. Determine the focal length of the lens.
(a) Determine the ‘effective focal length’ of the combination of the
two lenses in Exercise 9.10, if they are placed 8.0 cm apart with
their principal axes coincident. Does the answer depend on
which side of the combination a beam of parallel light is incident?
Is the notion of effective focal length of this system useful at all?
(b) An object 1.5 cm in size is placed on the side of the convex lens
in the arrangement (a) above. The distance between the object
347Physics
9.22
9.23
9.24
9.25
9.26
9.27
9.28
9.29
9.30
9.31
348
and the convex lens is 40 cm. Determine the magnification
produced by the two-lens system, and the size of the image.
At what angle should a ray of light be incident on the face of a prism
of refracting angle 60° so that it just suffers total internal reflection
at the other face? The refractive index of the material of the prism is
1.524.
You are given prisms made of crown glass and flint glass with a
wide variety of angles. Suggest a combination of prisms which will
(a) deviate a pencil of white light without much dispersion,
(b) disperse (and displace) a pencil of white light without much
deviation.
For a normal eye, the far point is at infinity and the near point of
distinct vision is about 25 cm in front of the eye. The cornea of the
eye provides a converging power of about 40 dioptres, and the least
converging power of the eye-lens behind the cornea is about 20
dioptres. From this rough data estimate the range of accommodation
(i.e., the range of converging power of the eye-lens) of a normal eye.
Does short-sightedness (myopia) or long-sightedness (hyper -
metropia) imply necessarily that the eye has partially lost its ability
of accommodation? If not, what might cause these defects of vision?
A myopic person has been using spectacles of power –1.0 dioptre
for distant vision. During old age he also needs to use separate
reading glass of power + 2.0 dioptres. Explain what may have
happened.
A person looking at a person wearing a shirt with a pattern
comprising vertical and horizontal lines is able to see the vertical
lines more distinctly than the horizontal ones. What is this defect
due to? How is such a defect of vision corrected?
A man with normal near point (25 cm) reads a book with small print
using a magnifying glass: a thin convex lens of focal length 5 cm.
(a) What is the closest and the farthest distance at which he should
keep the lens from the page so that he can read the book when
viewing through the magnifying glass?
(b) What is the maximum and the minimum angular magnification
(magnifying power) possible using the above simple microscope?
A card sheet divided into squares each of size 1 mm 2 is being viewed
at a distance of 9 cm through a magnifying glass (a converging lens
of focal length 9 cm) held close to the eye.
(a) What is the magnification produced by the lens? How much is
the area of each square in the virtual image?
(b) What is the angular magnification (magnifying power) of the
lens ?
(c) Is the magnification in (a) equal to the magnifying power in (b)?
Explain.
(a) At what distance should the lens be held from the figure in
Exercise 9.29 in order to view the squares distinctly with the
maximum possible magnifying power?
(b) What is the magnification in this case?
(c) Is the magnification equal to the magnifying power in this case?
Explain.
What should be the distance between the object in Exercise 9.30
and the magnifying glass if the virtual image of each square in the
figure is to have an area of 6.25 mm 2 . Would you be able to see the
squares distinctly with your eyes very close to the magnifier ?Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments
9.32
9.33
9.34
9.35
9.36
9.37
[Note: Exercises 9.29 to 9.31 will help you clearly understand the
difference between magnification in absolute size and the angular
magnification (or magnifying power) of an instrument.]
Answer the following questions:
(a) The angle subtended at the eye by an object is equal to the
angle subtended at the eye by the virtual image produced by a
magnifying glass. In what sense then does a magnifying glass
provide angular magnification?
(b) In viewing through a magnifying glass, one usually positions
one’s eyes very close to the lens. Does angular magnification
change if the eye is moved back?
(c) Magnifying power of a simple microscope is inversely proportional
to the focal length of the lens. What then stops us from using a
convex lens of smaller and smaller focal length and achieving
greater and greater magnifying power?
(d) Why must both the objective and the eyepiece of a compound
microscope have short focal lengths?
(e) When viewing through a compound microscope, our eyes should
be positioned not on the eyepiece but a short distance away
from it for best viewing. Why? How much should be that short
distance between the eye and eyepiece?
An angular magnification (magnifying power) of 30X is desired using
an objective of focal length 1.25 cm and an eyepiece of focal length
5 cm. How will you set up the compound microscope?
A small telescope has an objective lens of focal length 140 cm and
an eyepiece of focal length 5.0 cm. What is the magnifying power of
the telescope for viewing distant objects when
(a) the telescope is in normal adjustment (i.e., when the final image
is at infinity)?
(b) the final image is formed at the least distance of distinct vision
(25 cm)?
(a) For the telescope described in Exercise 9.34 (a), what is the
separation between the objective lens and the eyepiece?
(b) If this telescope is used to view a 100 m tall tower 3 km away,
what is the height of the image of the tower formed by the objective
lens?
(c) What is the height of the final image of the tower if it is formed at
25 cm?
A Cassegrain telescope uses two mirrors as shown in Fig. 9.33. Such
a telescope is built with the mirrors 20 mm apart. If the radius of
curvature of the large mirror is 220 mm and the small mirror is
140 mm, where will the final image of an object at infinity be?
Light incident normally on a plane mirror attached to a galvanometer
coil retraces backwards as shown in Fig. 9.36. A current in the coil
produces a deflection of 3.5 o of the mirror. What is the displacement
of the reflected spot of light on a screen placed 1.5 m away?
FIGURE 9.36
349Physics
9.38
Figure 9.37 shows an equiconvex lens (of refractive index 1.50) in
contact with a liquid layer on top of a plane mirror. A small needle
with its tip on the principal axis is moved along the axis until its
inverted image is found at the position of the needle. The distance of
the needle from the lens is measured to be 45.0 cm. The liquid is
removed and the experiment is repeated. The new distance is
measured to be 30.0 cm. What is the refractive index of the liquid?
FIGURE 9.37
350
Wave Optics
Chapter Ten
WAVE OPTICS
10.1 I NTRODUCTION
In 1637 Descartes gave the corpuscular model of light and derived Snell’s
law. It explained the laws of reflection and refraction of light at an interface.
The corpuscular model predicted that if the ray of light (on refraction)
bends towards the normal then the speed of light would be greater in the
second medium. This corpuscular model of light was further developed
by Isaac Newton in his famous book entitled OPTICKS and because of
the tremendous popularity of this book, the corpuscular model is very
often attributed to Newton.
In 1678, the Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens put forward the
wave theory of light – it is this wave model of light that we will discuss in
this chapter. As we will see, the wave model could satisfactorily explain
the phenomena of reflection and refraction; however, it predicted that on
refraction if the wave bends towards the normal then the speed of light
would be less in the second medium. This is in contradiction to the
prediction made by using the corpuscular model of light. It was much
later confirmed by experiments where it was shown that the speed of
light in water is less than the speed in air confirming the prediction of the
wave model; Foucault carried out this experiment in 1850.
The wave theory was not readily accepted primarily because of
351
Newton’s authority and also because light could travel through vacuumPhysics
and it was felt that a wave would always require a medium to propagate
from one point to the other. However, when Thomas Young performed
his famous interference experiment in 1801, it was firmly established
that light is indeed a wave phenomenon. The wavelength of visible
light was measured and found to be extremely small; for example, the
wavelength of yellow light is about 0.5 μm. Because of the smallness
of the wavelength of visible light (in comparison to the dimensions of
typical mirrors and lenses), light can be assumed to approximately
travel in straight lines. This is the field of geometrical optics, which we
had discussed in the previous chapter. Indeed, the branch of optics in
which one completely neglects the finiteness of the wavelength is called
geometrical optics and a ray is defined as the path of energy
propagation in the limit of wavelength tending to zero.
After the interference experiment of Young in 1801, for the next 40
years or so, many experiments were carried out involving the
interference and diffraction of lightwaves; these experiments could only
be satisfactorily explained by assuming a wave model of light. Thus,
around the middle of the nineteenth century, the wave theory seemed
to be very well established. The only major difficulty was that since it
was thought that a wave required a medium for its propagation, how
could light waves propagate through vacuum. This was explained
when Maxwell put forward his famous electromagnetic theory of light.
Maxwell had developed a set of equations describing the laws of
electricity and magnetism and using these equations he derived what
is known as the wave equation from which he predicted the existence
of electromagnetic waves*. From the wave equation, Maxwell could
calculate the speed of electromagnetic waves in free space and he found
that the theoretical value was very close to the measured value of speed
o f l i g h t . F r o m t h i s , h e p r o p o u n d e d t h a t light must be an
electromagnetic wave. Thus, according to Maxwell, light waves are
associated with changing electric and magnetic fields; changing electric
field produces a time and space varying magnetic field and a changing
magnetic field produces a time and space varying electric field. The
changing electric and magnetic fields result in the propagation of
electromagnetic waves (or light waves) even in vacuum.
In this chapter we will first discuss the original formulation of the
Huygens principle and derive the laws of reflection and refraction. In
Sections 10.4 and 10.5, we will discuss the phenomenon of interference
which is based on the principle of superposition. In Section 10.6 we
will discuss the phenomenon of diffraction which is based on Huygens-
Fresnel principle. Finally in Section 10.7 we will discuss the
phenomenon of polarisation which is based on the fact that the light
waves are transverse electromagnetic waves.
352
* Maxwell had predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves around 1855; it
was much later (around 1890) that Heinrich Hertz produced radiowaves in the
laboratory. J.C. Bose and G. Marconi made practical applications of the Hertzian
wavesWave Optics
D OES LIGHT TRAVEL IN A STRAIGHT LINE ?
Light travels in a straight line in Class VI; it does not do so in Class XII and beyond! Surprised,
aren’t you?
In school, you are shown an experiment in which you take three cardboards with
pinholes in them, place a candle on one side and look from the other side. If the flame of the
candle and the three pinholes are in a straight line, you can see the candle. Even if one of
them is displaced a little, you cannot see the candle. This proves, so your teacher says,
that light travels in a straight line.
In the present book, there are two consecutive chapters, one on ray optics and the other
on wave optics. Ray optics is based on rectilinear propagation of light, and deals with
mirrors, lenses, reflection, refraction, etc. Then you come to the chapter on wave optics,
and you are told that light travels as a wave, that it can bend around objects, it can diffract
and interfere, etc.
In optical region, light has a wavelength of about half a micrometre. If it encounters an
obstacle of about this size, it can bend around it and can be seen on the other side. Thus a
micrometre size obstacle will not be able to stop a light ray. If the obstacle is much larger,
however, light will not be able to bend to that extent, and will not be seen on the other side.
This is a property of a wave in general, and can be seen in sound waves too. The sound
wave of our speech has a wavelength of about 50 cm to 1 m. If it meets an obstacle of the
size of a few metres, it bends around it and reaches points behind the obstacle. But when it
comes across a larger obstacle of a few hundred metres, such as a hillock, most of it is
reflected and is heard as an echo.
Then what about the primary school experiment? What happens there is that when we
move any cardboard, the displacement is of the order of a few millimetres, which is much
larger than the wavelength of light. Hence the candle cannot be seen. If we are able to move
one of the cardboards by a micrometer or less, light will be able to diffract, and the candle
will still be seen.
One could add to the first sentence in this box : It learns how to bend as it grows up!
10.2 H UYGENS P RINCIPLE
We would first define a wavefront: when we drop a small stone on a calm
pool of water, waves spread out from the point of impact. Every point on
the surface starts oscillating with time. At any instant, a photograph of
the surface would show circular rings on which the disturbance is
maximum. Clearly, all points on such a circle are oscillating in phase
because they are at the same distance from the source. Such a locus of
points, which oscillate in phase is called a wavefront ; thus a wavefront
is defined as a surface of constant phase. The speed with which the
wavefront moves outwards from the source is called the speed of the FIGURE 10.1 (a) A
wave. The energy of the wave travels in a direction perpendicular to the diverging spherical
wave emanating from
wavefront.
If we have a point source emitting waves uniformly in all directions, a point source. The
wavefronts are
then the locus of points which have the same amplitude and vibrate in
spherical.
the same phase are spheres and we have what is known as a spherical
353
wave as shown in Fig. 10.1(a). At a large distance from the source, aPhysics
small portion of the sphere can be considered as a plane and we have
what is known as a plane wave [Fig. 10.1(b)].
Now, if we know the shape of the wavefront at t = 0, then Huygens
principle allows us to determine the shape of the wavefront at a later
time τ . Thus, Huygens principle is essentially a geometrical construction,
which given the shape of the wafefront at any time allows us to determine
FIGURE 10.1 (b) At a
large distance from the shape of the wavefront at a later time. Let us consider a diverging
the source, a small wave and let F 1 F 2 represent a portion of the spherical wavefront at t = 0
(Fig. 10.2). Now, according to Huygens principle, each point of the
portion of the
spherical wave can wavefront is the source of a secondary disturbance and the wavelets
be approximated by a emanating from these points spread out in all directions with the speed
plane wave.
of the wave. These wavelets emanating from the wavefront are usually
referred to as secondary wavelets and if we draw a common tangent
to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the wavefront at a
later time.
FIGURE 10.2 F 1 F 2 represents the spherical wavefront (with O as
centre) at t = 0. The envelope of the secondary wavelets
emanating from F 1 F 2 produces the forward moving wavefront G 1 G 2 .
The backwave D 1 D 2 does not exist.
Thus, if we wish to determine the shape of the wavefront at t = τ , we
draw spheres of radius v τ from each point on the spherical wavefront
FIGURE 10.3
Huygens geometrical where v represents the speed of the waves in the medium. If we now draw
a common tangent to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the
construction for a
wavefront at t = τ . The new wavefront shown as G 1 G 2 in Fig. 10.2 is again
plane wave
spherical with point O as the centre.
propagating to the
right. F 1 F 2 is the
The above model has one shortcoming: we also have a backwave which
plane wavefront at is shown as D D in Fig. 10.2. Huygens argued that the amplitude of the
1 2
t = 0 and G 1 G 2 is the secondary wavelets is maximum in the forward direction and zero in the
wavefront at a later
backward direction; by making this adhoc assumption, Huygens could
time τ . The lines A 1 A 2 ,
explain the absence of the backwave. However, this adhoc assumption is
B 1 B 2 ... etc, are
normal to both F 1 F 2 not satisfactory and the absence of the backwave is really justified from
more rigorous wave theory.
and G 1 G 2 and
In a similar manner, we can use Huygens principle to determine the
represent rays.
shape of the wavefront for a plane wave propagating through a medium
354
(Fig. 10.3).Wave Optics
10.3 R EFRACTION AND R EFLECTION OF
P LANE W AVES USING H UYGENS
P RINCIPLE
10.3.1 Refraction of a plane wave
BC = v 1 τ
FIGURE 10.4 A plane wave AB is incident at an angle i
on the surface PP′ separating medium 1 and medium 2.
The plane wave undergoes refraction and CE represents
the refracted wavefront. The figure corresponds to v 2 < v 1
so that the refracted waves bends towards the normal.
Christiaan Huygens
(1629 – 1695) Dutch
physicist, astronomer,
mathematician and the
founder of the wave
theory of light. His book,
T reatise on light, makes
fascinating reading even
today. He brilliantly
explained the double
refraction shown by the
mineral calcite in this
work in addition to
reflection and refraction.
He was the first to
analyse circular and
simple harmonic motion
and designed and built
improved clocks and
telescopes. He discovered
the true geometry of
Saturn’s rings.
95
We will now use Huygens principle to derive the laws of
refraction. Let PP′ represent the surface separating medium
1 and medium 2, as shown in Fig. 10.4. Let v 1 and v 2
represent the speed of light in medium 1 and medium 2,
respectively. We assume a plane wavefront AB propagating
in the direction A′A incident on the interface at an angle i
as shown in the figure. Let τ be the time taken by the
wavefront to travel the distance BC. Thus,
In order to determine the shape of the refracted wavefront, we draw a
sphere of radius v 2 τ from the point A in the second medium (the speed of
the wave in the second medium is v 2 ). Let CE represent a tangent plane
drawn from the point C on to the sphere. Then, AE = v 2 τ and CE would
represent the refracted wavefront. If we now consider the triangles ABC
and AEC, we readily obtain
sin i =
BC v 1 τ
=
AC AC
(10.1)
and
AE v 2 τ
=
(10.2)
AC AC
where i and r are the angles of incidence and refraction, respectively.
sin r =
355Physics
Thus we obtain
(10.3)
From the above equation, we get the important result that if r < i (i.e.,
if the ray bends toward the normal), the speed of the light wave in the
second medium (v 2 ) will be less then the speed of the light wave in the
first medium (v 1 ). This prediction is opposite to the prediction from the
corpuscular model of light and as later experiments showed, the prediction
of the wave theory is correct. Now, if c represents the speed of light in
vacuum, then,
n 1 =
c
v 1 (10.4)
c
v 2 (10.5)
and
n 2 =
are known as the refractive indices of medium 1 and medium 2,
respectively. In terms of the refractive indices, Eq. (10.3) can be
written as
n 1 sin i = n 2 sin r
(10.6)
This is the Snell’s law of refraction. Further, if λ 1 and λ 2 denote the
wavelengths of light in medium 1 and medium 2, respectively and if the
distance BC is equal to λ 1 then the distance AE will be equal to λ 2 (because
if the crest from B has reached C in time τ , then the crest from A should
have also reached E in time τ ); thus,
sin i
v
= 1
sin r
v 2
λ 1
BC
v
=
= 1
λ 2
AE
v 2
or
v 1
λ 1
=
v 2
λ 2
(10.7)
The above equation implies that when a wave gets refracted into a
denser medium (v 1 > v 2 ) the wavelength and the speed of propagation
decrease but the frequency ν (= v/λ) remains the same.
10.3.2 Refraction at a rarer medium
We now consider refraction of a plane wave at a rarer medium, i.e.,
v 2 > v 1 . Proceeding in an exactly similar manner we can construct a
refracted wavefront as shown in Fig. 10.5. The angle of refraction
will now be greater than angle of incidence; however, we will still have
n 1 sin i = n 2 sin r . We define an angle i c by the following equation
n 2
(10.8)
n 1
Thus, if i = i c then sin r = 1 and r = 90°. Obviously, for i > i c , there can
not be any refracted wave. The angle i c is known as the critical angle and
for all angles of incidence greater than the critical angle, we will not have
sin i c =
356Wave Optics
any refracted wave and the wave will undergo what is known as total
internal reflection. The phenomenon of total internal reflection and its
applications was discussed in Section 9.4.
FIGURE 10.5 Refraction of a plane wave incident on a rarer medium for
which v 2 > v 1 . The plane wave bends away from the normal.
10.3.3 Reflection of a plane wave by a plane surface
We next consider a plane wave AB incident at an angle i on a reflecting
surface MN. If v represents the speed of the wave in the medium and if τ
represents the time taken by the wavefront to advance from the point B
to C then the distance
BC = v τ
In order the construct the reflected wavefront we draw a sphere of
radius v τ from the point A as shown in Fig. 10.6. Let CE represent the
tangent plane drawn from the point C to this sphere. Obviously
AE = BC = v τ
FIGURE 10.6 Reflection of a plane wave AB by the reflecting surface MN.
AB and CE represent incident and reflected wavefronts.
If we now consider the triangles EAC and BAC we will find that they
are congruent and therefore, the angles i and r (as shown in Fig. 10.6)
would be equal. This is the law of reflection.
Once we have the laws of reflection and refraction, the behaviour of
prisms, lenses, and mirrors can be understood. These phenomena were
357Physics
discussed in detail in Chapter 9 on the basis of rectilinear propagation of
light. Here we just describe the behaviour of the wavefronts as they
undergo reflection or refraction. In Fig. 10.7(a) we consider a plane wave
passing through a thin prism. Clearly, since the speed of light waves is
less in glass, the lower portion of the incoming wavefront (which travels
through the greatest thickness of glass) will get delayed resulting in a tilt
in the emerging wavefront as shown in the figure. In Fig. 10.7(b) we
consider a plane wave incident on a thin convex lens; the central part of
the incident plane wave traverses the thickest portion of the lens and is
delayed the most. The emerging wavefront has a depression at the centre
and therefore the wavefront becomes spherical and converges to the point
F which is known as the focus. In Fig. 10.7(c) a plane wave is incident on
a concave mirror and on reflection we have a spherical wave converging
to the focal point F. In a similar manner, we can understand refraction
and reflection by concave lenses and convex mirrors.
FIGURE 10.7 Refraction of a plane wave by (a) a thin prism, (b) a convex lens. (c) Reflection of a
plane wave by a concave mirror.
From the above discussion it follows that the total time taken from a
point on the object to the corresponding point on the image is the same
measured along any ray. For example, when a convex lens focusses light
to form a real image, although the ray going through the centre traverses
a shorter path, but because of the slower speed in glass, the time taken
is the same as for rays travelling near the edge of the lens.
10.3.4 The doppler effect
358
We should mention here that one should be careful in constructing the
wavefronts if the source (or the observer) is moving. For example, if there
is no medium and the source moves away from the observer, then later
wavefronts have to travel a greater distance to reach the observer and
hence take a longer time. The time taken between the arrival of two
successive wavefronts is hence longer at the observer than it is at the
source. Thus, when the source moves away from the observer the
frequency as measured by the source will be smaller. This is known as
the Doppler effect. Astronomers call the increase in wavelength due to
doppler effect as red shift since a wavelength in the middle of the visible
region of the spectrum moves towards the red end of the spectrum. When
waves are received from a source moving towards the observer, there is
an apparent decrease in wavelength, this is referred to as blue shift.Wave Optics
You have already encountered Doppler effect for sound waves in
Chapter 15 of Class XI textbook. For velocities small compared to the
speed of light, we can use the same formulae which we use for sound
waves. The fractional change in frequency ∆ν/ν is given by –v radial /c, where
v radial is the component of the source velocity along the line joining the
observer to the source relative to the observer; v radial is considered positive
when the source moves away from the observer. Thus, the Doppler shift
can be expressed as:
∆ ν
ν
= –
v radial
c
(10.9)
The formula given above is valid only when the speed of the source is
small compared to that of light. A more accurate formula for the Doppler
effect which is valid even when the speeds are close to that of light, requires
the use of Einstein’s special theory of relativity. The Doppler effect for
light is very important in astronomy. It is the basis for the measurements
of the radial velocities of distant galaxies.
Example 10.1 What speed should a galaxy move with respect
to us so that the sodium line at 589.0 nm is observed
at 589.6 nm?
Solution Since νλ = c,
∆ ν
ν
= –
∆ λ
λ
(for small changes in ν and λ ). For
∆λ = 589.6 – 589.0 = + 0.6 nm
we get [using Eq. (10.9)]
∆ ν
ν
= –
∆ λ
λ
= –
v radial
c
= 306 km/s
Therefore, the galaxy is moving away from us.
Solution
(a) Reflection and refraction arise through interaction of incident light
with the atomic constituents of matter. Atoms may be viewed as
Example 10.2
(a) When monochromatic light is incident on a surface separating
two media, the reflected and refracted light both have the same
frequency as the incident frequency. Explain why?
(b) When light travels from a rarer to a denser medium, the speed
decreases. Does the reduction in speed imply a reduction in the
energy carried by the light wave?
(c) In the wave picture of light, intensity of light is determined by the
square of the amplitude of the wave. What determines the intensity
of light in the photon picture of light.
 0.6 
5
–1
or, v radial ≅ + c  
 = + 3.06 × 10 m s
589.0 
359Physics
oscillators, which take up the frequency of the external agency (light)
causing forced oscillations. The frequency of light emitted by a charged
oscillator equals its frequency of oscillation. Thus, the frequency of
scattered light equals the frequency of incident light.
(b) No. Energy carried by a wave depends on the amplitude of the
wave, not on the speed of wave propagation.
(c) For a given frequency, intensity of light in the photon picture is
determined by the number of photons crossing an unit area per
unit time.
10.4 C OHERENT AND I NCOHERENT A DDITION OF W AVES
(a)
In this section we will discuss the interference pattern produced by
the superposition of two waves. You may recall that we had discussed
the superposition principle in Chapter 15 of your Class XI textbook.
Indeed the entire field of interference is based on the superposition
principle according to which at a particular point in the medium, the
resultant displacement produced by a number of waves is the vector
sum of the displacements produced by each of the waves.
Consider two needles S 1 and S 2 moving periodically up and down
in an identical fashion in a trough of water [Fig. 10.8(a)]. They produce
two water waves, and at a particular point, the phase difference between
the displacements produced by each of the waves does not change
with time; when this happens the two sources are said to be coherent.
Figure 10.8(b) shows the position of crests (solid circles) and troughs
(dashed circles) at a given instant of time. Consider a point P for which
S 1 P = S 2 P
(b)
FIGURE 10.8 (a) Two
needles oscillating in
phase in water
represent two coherent
sources.
(b) The pattern of
displacement of water
molecules at an
instant on the surface
of water showing nodal
N (no displacement)
and antinodal A
(maximum
displacement) lines.
360
Since the distances S 1 P and S 2 P are equal, waves from S 1 and S 2
will take the same time to travel to the point P and waves that emanate
from S 1 and S 2 in phase will also arrive, at the point P, in phase.
Thus, if the displacement produced by the source S 1 at the point P
is given by
y 1 = a cos ω t
then, the displacement produced by the source S 2 (at the point P) will
also be given by
y 2 = a cos ω t
Thus, the resultant of displacement at P would be given by
y = y 1 + y 2 = 2 a cos ω t
Since the intensity is the proportional to the square of the
amplitude, the resultant intensity will be given by
I = 4 I 0
where I 0 represents the intensity produced by each one of the individual
sources; I 0 is proportional to a 2 . In fact at any point on the perpendicular
bisector of S 1 S 2 , the intensity will be 4I 0 . The two sources are said toWave Optics
interfere constructively and we have what is referred to as constructive
interference. We next consider a point Q [Fig. 10.9(a)]
for which
S 2 Q –S 1 Q = 2 λ
The waves emanating from S 1 will arrive exactly two cycles earlier
than the waves from S 2 and will again be in phase [Fig. 10.9(a)]. Thus, if
the displacement produced by S 1 is given by
y 1 = a cos ω t
then the displacement produced by S 2 will be given by
y 2 = a cos ( ω t – 4π) = a cos ω t
where we have used the fact that a path difference of 2 λ corresponds to a
phase difference of 4π. The two displacements are once again in phase
and the intensity will again be 4 I 0 giving rise to constructive interference.
In the above analysis we have assumed that the distances S 1 Q and S 2 Q
are much greater than d (which represents the distance between S 1 and
S 2 ) so that although S 1 Q and S 2 Q are not equal, the amplitudes of the
displacement produced by each wave are very nearly the same.
We next consider a point R [Fig. 10.9(b)] for which
FIGURE 10.9
(a) Constructive
The waves emanating from S 1 will arrive exactly two and a half cycles
interference at a
later than the waves from S 2 [Fig. 10.10(b)]. Thus if the displacement point Q for which the
path difference is 2 λ .
produced by S 1 is given by
(b) Destructive
y 1 = a cos ω t
interference at a
point R for which the
then the displacement produced by S 2 will be given by
path difference is
y 2 = a cos ( ω t + 5π) = – a cos ω t
2.5 λ .
S 2 R – S 1 R = –2.5 λ
where we have used the fact that a path difference of 2.5 λ corresponds to
a phase difference of 5π. The two displacements are now out of phase
and the two displacements will cancel out to give zero intensity. This is
referred to as destructive interference.
To summarise: If we have two coherent sources S 1 and S 2 vibrating
in phase, then for an arbitrary point P whenever the path difference,
S 1 P ~ S 2 P = n λ
(n = 0, 1, 2, 3,...)
(10.10)
we will have constructive interference and the resultant intensity will be
4I 0 ; the sign ~ between S 1 P and S 2 P represents the difference between
S 1 P and S 2 P. On the other hand, if the point P is such that the path
difference,
1
) λ (n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...)
(10.11)
2
FIGURE 10.10 Locus
we will have destructive interference and the resultant intensity will be of points for which
zero. Now, for any other arbitrary point G (Fig. 10.10) let the phase S P – S P is equal to
1
2
difference between the two displacements be φ . Thus, if the displacement
zero, ±λ , ± 2 λ , ± 3 λ .
produced by S 1 is given by
S 1 P ~ S 2 P = (n+
y 1 = a cos ω t
361Physics
then, the displacement produced by S 2 would be
y 2 = a cos ( ω t + φ )
and the resultant displacement will be given by
y = y 1 + y 2
= a [cos ω t + cos ( ω t + φ )]
= 2 a cos ( φ /2) cos ( ω t + φ /2)
The amplitude of the resultant displacement is 2a cos (φ/2) and
therefore the intensity at that point will be
I = 4 I 0 cos 2 (φ /2)
(10.12)
If φ = 0, ± 2 π, ± 4 π,... which corresponds to the condition given by
Eq. (10.10) we will have constructive interference leading to maximum
intensity. On the other hand, if φ = ± π, ± 3π, ± 5π ... [which corresponds to
the condition given by Eq. (10.11)] we will have destructive interference
leading to zero intensity.
Now if the two sources are coherent (i.e., if the two needles are going
up and down regularly) then the phase difference φ at any point will not
change with time and we will have a stable interference pattern; i.e., the
positions of maxima and minima will not change with time. However, if
the two needles do not maintain a constant phase difference, then the
interference pattern will also change with time and, if the phase difference
changes very rapidly with time, the positions of maxima and minima will
also vary rapidly with time and we will see a “time-averaged” intensity
distribution. When this happens, we will observe an average intensity
that will be given by
< I >= 4 I 0 < cos 2 ( φ /2 ) >
(10.13)
where angular brackets represent time averaging. Indeed it is shown in
Section 7.2 that if φ (t ) varies randomly with time, the time-averaged
quantity < cos 2 ( φ /2) > will be 1/2. This is also intuitively obvious because
the function cos 2 ( φ /2) will randomly vary between 0 and 1 and the
average value will be 1/2. The resultant intensity will be given by
I = 2 I 0
(10.14)
at all points.
When the phase difference between the two vibrating sources changes
rapidly with time, we say that the two sources are incoherent and when
this happens the intensities just add up. This is indeed what happens
when two separate light sources illuminate a wall.
10.5 I NTERFERENCE
E XPERIMENT
362
OF
L IGHT W AVES
AND
Y OUNG ’ S
We will now discuss interference using light waves. If we use two sodium
lamps illuminating two pinholes (Fig. 10.11) we will not observe any
interference fringes. This is because of the fact that the light wave emitted
from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) undergoes abrupt phaseWave Optics
changes in times of the order of 10 –10 seconds. Thus
the light waves coming out from two independent
sources of light will not have any fixed phase
relationship and would be incoherent, when this
happens, as discussed in the previous section, the
intensities on the screen will add up.
The British physicist Thomas Young used an
ingenious technique to “lock” the phases of the waves
emanating from S 1 and S 2 . He made two pinholes S 1
FIGURE 10.11 If two sodium
and S 2 (very close to each other) on an opaque screen
lamps illuminate two pinholes
[Fig. 10.12(a)]. These were illuminated by another
S 1 and S 2 , the intensities will add
pinholes that was in turn, lit by a bright source. Light
up and no interference fringes will
be observed on the screen.
waves spread out from S and fall on both S 1 and S 2 .
S 1 and S 2 then behave like two coherent sources
because light waves coming out from S 1 and S 2 are derived from the
same original source and any abrupt phase change in S will manifest in
exactly similar phase changes in the light coming out from S 1 and S 2 .
Thus, the two sources S 1 and S 2 will be locked in phase; i.e., they will be
coherent like the two vibrating needle in our water wave example
[Fig. 10.8(a)].
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.12 Young’s arrangement to produce interference pattern.
Thus spherical waves emanating from S 1 and S 2 will produce
interference fringes on the screen GG′, as shown in Fig. 10.12(b). The
positions of maximum and minimum intensities can be calculated by
using the analysis given in Section 10.4 where we had shown that for an
arbitrary point P on the line GG′ [Fig. 10.12(b)] to correspond to a
maximum, we must have
S 2 P – S 1 P = n λ ; n = 0, 1, 2 ...
(10.15)
Now,
2
2
 2 
d  
d    2 
D
+
x
+
–
D
+
x
–



 

 
 
(S 2 P ) – (S 1 P ) =
2     
2    = 2x d
 
2
2
363Physics
where S 1 S 2 = d and OP = x . Thus
S 2 P – S 1 P =
2 xd
S 2 P+S 1 P
(10.16)
If x, d<<D then negligible error will be introduced if
S 2 P + S 1 P (in the denominator) is replaced by 2D. For
example, for d = 0.1 cm, D = 100 cm, OP = 1 cm (which
correspond to typical values for an interference
experiment using light waves), we have
S 2 P + S 1 P = [(100) 2 + (1.05) 2 ] 1⁄2 + [(100) 2 + (0.95) 2 ] 1⁄2
Thomas
Young
(1773 – 1829) English
physicist, physician and
Egyptologist. Young worked
on a wide variety of
scientific problems, ranging
from the structure of the eye
and the mechanism of
vision to the decipherment
of the Rosetta stone. He
revived the wave theory of
light and recognised that
interference phenomena
provide proof of the wave
properties of light.
≈ 200.01 cm
Thus if we replace S 2 P + S 1 P by 2 D, the error involved is
about 0.005%. In this approximation, Eq. (10.16)
becomes
S 2 P – S 1 P ≈
(10.17)
Hence we will have constructive interference resulting in
a bright region when
n λ D
; n = 0, ± 1, ± 2, ...
(10.18)
d
On the other hand, we will have a dark region near
x = x n =
λ D
; n = 0, ± 1, ± 2
(10.19)
d
Thus dark and bright bands appear on the screen, as shown in
Fig. 10.13. Such bands are called fringes. Equations (10.18) and (10.19)
show that dark and bright fringes are equally spaced and the distance
between two consecutive bright and dark fringes is given by
x = x n = (n+
)
β = x n+1 –x n
or β =
364
λ D
(10.20)
d
which is the expression for the fringe width. Obviously, the central point
O (in Fig. 10.12) will be bright because S 1 O = S 2 O and it will correspond
to n = 0. If we consider the line perpendicular to the plane of the paper
and passing through O [i.e., along the y-axis] then all points on this line
will be equidistant from S 1 and S 2 and we will have a bright central fringe
which is a straight line as shown in Fig. 10.13. In order to determine the
shape of the interference pattern on the screen we note that a particular
fringe would correspond to the locus of points with a constant value of
S 2 P – S 1 P. Whenever this constant is an integral multiple of λ , the fringe
will be bright and whenever it is an odd integral multiple of λ/2 it will be
a dark fringe. Now, the locus of the point P lying in the x-y plane such
that S 2 P – S 1 P (= ∆) is a constant, is a hyperbola. Thus the fringe pattern
will strictly be a hyperbola; however, if the distance D is very large compared
to the fringe width, the fringes will be very nearly straight lines as shown
in Fig. 10.13.Wave Optics
FIGURE 10.13 Computer generated fringe pattern produced by two point source S 1 and S 2 on the
screen GG′ (Fig. 10.12); (a) and (b) correspond to d = 0.005 mm and 0.025 mm, respectively (both
figures correspond to D = 5 cm and λ = 5 × 10 –5 cm.) (Adopted from OPTICS by A. Ghatak, Tata
McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 2000.)
In the double-slit experiment shown in Fig. 10.12, we have taken the
source hole S on the perpendicular bisector of the two slits, which is
shown as the line SO. What happens if the source S is slightly away from
the perpendicular bisector. Consider that the source is moved to some
new point S′ and suppose that Q is the mid-point of S 1 and S 2 . If the
angle S′QS is φ , then the central bright fringe occurs at an angle – φ , on
the other side. Thus, if the source S is on the perpendicular bisector,
then the central fringe occurs at O, also on the perpendicular bisector. If
S is shifted by an angle φ to point S′, then the central fringe appears at a
point O ′ at an angle – φ , which means that it is shifted by the same angle
on the other side of the bisector. This also means that the source S′, the
mid-point Q and the point O′ of the central fringe are in a straight line.
We end this section by quoting from the Nobel lecture of Dennis Gabor*
The wave nature of light was demonstrated convincingly for the
first time in 1801 by Thomas Young by a wonderfully simple
experiment. He let a ray of sunlight into a dark room, placed a
dark screen in front of it, pierced with two small pinholes, and
beyond this, at some distance, a white screen. He then saw two
darkish lines at both sides of a bright line, which gave him
sufficient encouragement to repeat the experiment, this time with
spirit flame as light source, with a little salt in it to produce the
bright yellow sodium light. This time he saw a number of dark
lines, regularly spaced; the first clear proof that light added to
light can produce darkness. This phenomenon is called
* Dennis Gabor received the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering the
principles of holography.
365Physics
interference. Thomas Young had expected it because he believed
in the wave theory of light.
FIGURE 10.14 Photograph and the graph of the intensity
distribution in Young’s double-slit experiment.
We should mention here that the fringes are straight lines although
S 1 and S 2 are point sources. If we had slits instead of the point sources
(Fig. 10.14), each pair of points would have produced straight line fringes
resulting in straight line fringes with increased intensities.
Example 10.3 Two slits are made one millimetre apart and the screen
is placed one metre away. What is the fringe separation when blue-
green light of wavelength 500 nm is used?
Solution Fringe spacing =
D λ 1 × 5 × 10 –7
=
m
d
1 × 10 –3
= 5 × 10 –4 m = 0.5 mm
366
Example 10.4 What is the effect on the interference fringes in a
Young’s double-slit experiment due to each of the following operations:
(a) the screen is moved away from the plane of the slits;
(b) the (monochromatic) source is replaced by another
(monochromatic) source of shorter wavelength;
(c) the separation between the two slits is increased;
(d) the source slit is moved closer to the double-slit plane;
(e) the width of the source slit is increased;
(f ) the monochromatic source is replaced by a source of white
light?Wave Optics
( In each operation, take all parameters, other than the one specified,
to remain unchanged.)
Solution
(a) Angular separation of the fringes remains constant
(= λ /d). The actual
separation of the fringes increases in
proportion to the distance of the screen from the plane of the
two slits.
(b) The separation of the fringes (and also angular separation)
decreases. See, however, the condition mentioned in (d) below.
(c) The separation of the fringes (and also angular separation)
decreases. See, however, the condition mentioned in (d) below.
(d) Let s be the size of the source and S its distance from the plane of
the two slits. For interference fringes to be seen, the condition
s/S < λ/d should be satisfied; otherwise, interference patterns
produced by different parts of the source overlap and no fringes
are seen. Thus, as S decreases (i.e., the source slit is brought
closer), the interference pattern gets less and less sharp, and
when the source is brought too close for this condition to be valid,
the fringes disappear. Till this happens, the fringe separation
remains fixed.
(e) Same as in (d). As the source slit width increases, fringe pattern
gets less and less sharp. When the source slit is so wide that the
condition s/S ≤ λ/d is not satisfied, the interference pattern
disappears.
Thus, the fringe closest on either side of the central white fringe
is red and the farthest will appear blue. After a few fringes, no
clear fringe pattern is seen.
(f ) The interference patterns due to different component colours of
white light overlap (incoherently). The central bright fringes for
different colours are at the same position. Therefore, the central
fringe is white. For a point P for which S 2 P –S 1 P = λ b /2, where λ b
(≈ 4000 Å) represents the wavelength for the blue colour, the blue
component will be absent and the fringe will appear red in colour.
Slightly farther away where S 2 Q–S 1 Q = λ b = λ r /2 where λ r (≈ 8000 Å)
is the wavelength for the red colour, the fringe will be predominantly
blue.
10.6 D IFFRACTION
If we look clearly at the shadow cast by an opaque object, close to the
region of geometrical shadow, there are alternate dark and bright regions
just like in interference. This happens due to the phenomenon of
diffraction. Diffraction is a general characteristic exhibited by all types of
waves, be it sound waves, light waves, water waves or matter waves. Since
the wavelength of light is much smaller than the dimensions of most
obstacles; we do not encounter diffraction effects of light in everyday
observations. However, the finite resolution of our eye or of optical
367Physics
instruments such as telescopes or microscopes is limited due to the
phenomenon of diffraction. Indeed the colours that you see when a CD is
viewed is due to diffraction effects. We will now discuss the phenomenon
of diffraction.
10.6.1 The single slit
In the discussion of Young’s experiment, we stated that a single narrow
slit acts as a new source from which light spreads out. Even before Young,
early experimenters – including Newton – had noticed that light spreads
out from narrow holes and slits. It seems to turn around corners and
enter regions where we would expect a shadow. These effects, known as
diffraction, can only be properly understood using wave ideas. After all,
you are hardly surprised to hear sound waves from someone talking
around a corner !
When the double slit in Young’s experiment is replaced by a single
narrow slit (illuminated by a monochromatic source), a broad pattern
with a central bright region is seen. On both sides, there are alternate
dark and bright regions, the intensity becoming weaker away from the
centre (Fig. 10.16). To understand this, go to Fig. 10.15, which shows a
parallel beam of light falling normally on a single slit LN of width a. The
diffracted light goes on to meet a screen. The midpoint of the slit is M.
A straight line through M perpendicular to the slit plane meets the
screen at C. We want the intensity at any point P on the screen. As before,
straight lines joining P to the different points L,M,N, etc., can be treated as
parallel, making an angle θ with the normal MC.
The basic idea is to divide the slit into much smaller parts, and add
their contributions at P with the proper phase differences. We are treating
different parts of the wavefront at the slit as secondary sources. Because
the incoming wavefront is parallel to the plane of the slit, these sources
are in phase.
The path difference NP – LP between the two edges of the slit can be
calculated exactly as for Young’s experiment. From Fig. 10.15,
NP – LP = NQ
= a sin θ
≈ a θ
368
(10.21)
Similarly, if two points M 1 and M 2 in the slit plane are separated by y, the
path difference M 2 P – M 1 P ≈ y θ . We now have to sum up equal, coherent
contributions from a large number of sources, each with a different phase.
This calculation was made by Fresnel using integral calculus, so we omit
it here. The main features of the diffraction pattern can be understood by
simple arguments.
At the central point C on the screen, the angle θ is zero. All path
differences are zero and hence all the parts of the slit contribute in phase.
This gives maximum intensity at C. Experimental observation shown inWave Optics
Fig. 10.15 indicates that the intensity has a
central maximum at θ = 0 and other
secondary maxima at θ l (n+1/2) λ /a, and
has minima (zero intensity) at θ l n λ /a,
n = ±1, ±2, ±3, .... It is easy to see why it has
minima at these values of angle. Consider
first the angle θ where the path difference a θ
is λ . Then,
θ ≈ λ /a .
(10.22)
Now, divide the slit into two equal halves
FIGURE 10.15 The geometry of path
differences
for diffraction by a single slit.
LM and MN each of size a/2. For every point
M 1 in LM, there is a point M 2 in MN such that
M 1 M 2 = a/2. The path difference between M 1 and M 2 at P = M 2 P – M 1 P
= θ a/2 = λ /2 for the angle chosen. This means that the contributions
from M 1 and M 2 are 180o out of phase and cancel in the direction
θ = λ /a. Contributions from the two halves of the slit LM and MN,
therefore, cancel each other. Equation (10.22) gives the angle at which
the intensity falls to zero. One can similarly show that the intensity is
zero for θ = n λ /a, with n being any integer (except zero!). Notice that the
angular size of the central maximum increases when the slit width a
decreases.
It is also easy to see why there are maxima at θ = (n + 1/2) λ /a and
why they go on becoming weaker and weaker with increasing n. Consider
an angle θ = 3 λ /2a which is midway between two of the dark fringes.
Divide the slit into three equal parts. If we take the first two thirds of the
slit, the path difference between the two ends would be
2
2 a 3 λ
×
= λ
a × θ =
3
3
2 a
(10.23)
The first two-thirds of the slit can therefore be divided
into two halves which have a λ /2 path difference. The
contributions of these two halves cancel in the same manner
as described earlier. Only the remaining one-third of the
slit contributes to the intensity at a point between the two
minima. Clearly, this will be much weaker than the central
maximum (where the entire slit contributes in phase). One
can similarly show that there are maxima at (n + 1/2) λ /a
with n = 2, 3, etc. These become weaker with increasing n,
since only one-fifth, one-seventh, etc., of the slit contributes
in these cases. The photograph and intensity pattern
corresponding to it is shown in Fig. 10.16.
There has been prolonged discussion about difference
between intereference and diffraction among scientists since
the discovery of these phenomena. In this context, it is
FIGURE 10.16 Intensity
distribution and photograph of
fringes due to diffraction
at single slit.
369Physics
interesting to note what Richard Feynman* has said in his famous
Feynman Lectures on Physics:
In the double-slit experiment, we must note that the pattern on the
screen is actually a superposition of single-slit diffraction from each slit
or hole, and the double-slit interference pattern. This is shown in
Fig. 10.17. It shows a broader diffraction peak in which there appear
several fringes of smaller width due to double-slit interference. The
number of interference fringes occuring in the broad diffraction peak
depends on the ratio d/a, that is the ratio of the distance between the
two slits to the width of a slit. In the limit of a becoming very small, the
diffraction pattern will become very flat and we will obsrve the two-slit
interference pattern [see Fig. 10.13(b)].
FIGURE 10.17 The actual double-slit interference pattern.
The envelope shows the single slit diffraction.
Example 10.5 In Example 10.3, what should the width of each slit be
to obtain 10 maxima of the double slit pattern within the central
maximum of the single slit pattern?
No one has ever been able to define the difference between
interference and diffraction satisfactorily. It is just a question
of usage, and there is no specific, important physical difference
between them. The best we can do is, roughly speaking, is to
say that when there are only a few sources, say two interfering
sources, then the result is usually called interference, but if there
is a large number of them, it seems that the word diffraction is
more often used.
Solution We want a θ = λ , θ =
λ
λ
a
d
λ
a = = 0 . 2 mm
a
5
Notice that the wavelength of light and distance of the screen do not
enter in the calculation of a.
10
d
= 2
In the double-slit interference experiment of Fig. 10.12, what happens
if we close one slit? You will see that it now amounts to a single slit. But
you will have to take care of some shift in the pattern. We now have a
source at S, and only one hole (or slit) S 1 or S 2 . This will produce a single-
370
* Richand Feynman was one of the recipients of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics
for his fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics.Wave Optics
slit diffraction pattern on the screen. The centre of the central bright fringe
will appear at a point which lies on the straight line SS 1 or SS 2 , as the
case may be.
We now compare and contrast the interference pattern with that seen
for a coherently illuminated single slit (usually called the single slit
diffraction pattern).
(i) The interference pattern has a number of equally spaced bright and
dark bands. The diffraction pattern has a central bright maximum
which is twice as wide as the other maxima. The intensity falls as we
go to successive maxima away from the centre, on either side.
(ii) We calculate the interference pattern by superposing two waves
originating from the two narrow slits. The diffraction pattern is a
superposition of a continuous family of waves originating from each
point on a single slit.
(iii) For a single slit of width a, the first null of the interference pattern
occurs at an angle of λ /a. At the same angle of λ /a, we get a maximum
(not a null) for two narrow slits separated by a distance a.
One must understand that both d and a have to be quite small, to be
able to observe good interference and diffraction patterns. For example,
the separation d between the two slits must be of the order of a milimetre
or so. The width a of each slit must be even smaller, of the order of 0.1 or
0.2 mm.
In our discussion of Young’s experiment and the single-slit diffraction,
we have assumed that the screen on which the fringes are formed is at a
large distance. The two or more paths from the slits to the screen were
treated as parallel. This situation also occurs when we place a converging
lens after the slits and place the screen at the focus. Parallel paths from
the slit are combined at a single point on the screen. Note that the lens
does not introduce any extra path differences in a parallel beam. This
arrangement is often used since it gives more intensity than placing the
screen far away. If f is the focal length of the lens, then we can easily work
out the size of the central bright maximum. In terms of angles, the
separation of the central maximum from the first null of the diffraction
pattern is λ /a . Hence, the size on the screen will be f λ /a.
10.6.2 Seeing the single slit diffraction pattern
It is surprisingly easy to see the single-slit diffraction pattern for oneself.
The equipment needed can be found in most homes –– two razor blades
and one clear glass electric bulb preferably with a straight filament. One
has to hold the two blades so that the edges are parallel and have a
narrow slit in between. This is easily done with the thumb and forefingers
FIGURE 10.18
(Fig. 10.18).
Holding
two blades to
Keep the slit parallel to the filament, right in front of the eye. Use
form a single slit. A
spectacles if you normally do. With slight adjustment of the width of the
bulb filament viewed
slit and the parallelism of the edges, the pattern should be seen with its through this shows
bright and dark bands. Since the position of all the bands (except the
clear diffraction
central one) depends on wavelength, they will show some colours. Using
bands.
a filter for red or blue will make the fringes clearer. With both filters
371
available, the wider fringes for red compared to blue can be seen.Physics
In this experiment, the filament plays the role of the first slit S in
Fig. 10.16. The lens of the eye focuses the pattern on the screen (the
retina of the eye).
With some effort, one can cut a double slit in an aluminium foil with
a blade. The bulb filament can be viewed as before to repeat Young’s
experiment. In daytime, there is another suitable bright source subtending
a small angle at the eye. This is the reflection of the Sun in any shiny
convex surface (e.g., a cycle bell). Do not try direct sunlight – it can damage
the eye and will not give fringes anyway as the Sun subtends an angle
of (1/2)o.
In interference and diffraction, light energy is redistributed. If it
reduces in one region, producing a dark fringe, it increases in another
region, producing a bright fringe. There is no gain or loss of energy,
which is consistent with the principle of conservation of energy.
10.6.3 Resolving power of optical instruments
In Chapter 9 we had discussed about telescopes. The angular resolution
of the telescope is determined by the objective of the telescope. The stars
which are not resolved in the image produced by the objective cannot be
resolved by any further magnification produced by the eyepiece. The
primary purpose of the eyepiece is to provide magnification of the image
produced by the objective.
Consider a parallel beam of light falling on a convex lens. If the lens is
well corrected for aberrations, then geometrical optics tells us that the
beam will get focused to a point. However, because of diffraction, the
beam instead of getting focused to a point gets focused to a spot of finite
area. In this case the effects due to diffraction can be taken into account
by considering a plane wave incident on a circular aperture followed by
a convex lens (Fig. 10.19). The analysis of the corresponding diffraction
pattern is quite involved; however, in principle, it is similar to the analysis
carried out to obtain the single-slit diffraction pattern. Taking into account
the effects due to diffraction, the pattern on the focal plane would consist
of a central bright region surrounded by concentric dark and bright rings
(Fig. 10.19). A detailed analysis shows that the radius of the central bright
region is approximately given by
r 0 ≈
372
1.22 λ f
0.61 λ f
=
2 a
a
(10.24)
FIGURE 10.19 A parallel beam of light is incident on a convex lens.
Because of diffraction effects, the beam gets focused to a
spot of radius ≈ 0.61 λ f/a .Wave Optics
where f is the focal length of the lens and 2a is the diameter of the circular
aperture or the diameter of the lens, whichever is smaller. Typically if
λ ≈ 0.5 μm, f ≈ 20 cm and a ≈ 5 cm
we have
r 0 ≈ 1.2 μm
Although the size of the spot is very small, it plays an important role
in determining the limit of resolution of optical instruments like a telescope
or a microscope. For the two stars to be just resolved
f ∆ θ ≈ r 0 ≈
0.61 λ f
a
implying
0.61 λ
(10.25)
a
Thus ∆θ will be small if the diameter of the objective is large. This
implies that the telescope will have better resolving power if a is large. It
is for this reason that for better resolution, a telescope must have a large
diameter objective.
∆ θ ≈
Example 10.6 Assume that light of wavelength 6000Å is coming from
a star. What is the limit of resolution of a telescope whose objective
has a diameter of 100 inch?
∆ θ ≈
0.61 × 6 × 10
127
–5
≈ 2.9 × 10
–7
radians
XA
Solution A 100 inch telescope implies that 2a = 100 inch
= 254 cm. Thus if,
λ ≈ 6000Å = 6×10 –5 cm
then
We can apply a similar argument to the objective lens of a microscope.
In this case, the object is placed slightly beyond f, so that a real image is
formed at a distance v [Fig. 10.20]. The magnification – ratio of
image size to object size – is given by m l v/f. It can be seen from
Fig. 10.20 that
D/f l 2 tan β
(10.26)
where 2 β is the angle subtended by the diameter of the objective lens at
the focus of the microscope.
FIGURE 10.20 Real image formed by the objective lens of the microscope.
373Physics
D ETERMINE
THE RESOLVING POWER OF YOUR EYE
You can estimate the resolving power of your eye with a simple experiment. Make
black stripes of equal width separated by white stripes; see figure here. All the black
stripes should be of equal width, while the width of the intermediate white stripes should
increase as you go from the left to the right. For example, let all black stripes have a width
of 5 mm. Let the width of the first two white stripes be 0.5 mm each, the next two white
stripes be 1 mm each, the next two 1.5 mm each, etc. Paste this pattern on a wall in a
room or laboratory, at the height of your eye.
Now watch the pattern, preferably with one eye. By moving away or closer to the wall,
find the position where you can just see some two black stripes as separate stripes. All
the black stripes to the left of this stripe would merge into one another and would not be
distinguishable. On the other hand, the black stripes to the right of this would be more
and more clearly visible. Note the width d of the white stripe which separates the two
regions, and measure the distance D of the wall from your eye. Then d/D is the resolution
of your eye.
You have watched specks of dust floating in air in a sunbeam entering through your
window. Find the distance (of a speck) which you can clearly see and distinguish from a
neighbouring speck. Knowing the resolution of your eye and the distance of the speck,
estimate the size of the speck of dust.
When the separation between two points in a microscopic specimen
is comparable to the wavelength λ of the light, the diffraction effects
become important. The image of a point object will again be a diffraction
pattern whose size in the image plane will be
 1.22 λ 
v θ = v 
 D  
(10.27)
Two objects whose images are closer than this distance will not be
resolved, they will be seen as one. The corresponding minimum
separation, d min , in the object plane is given by
  1 . 22 λ  
 m
d min =  v  
D   

=
1 . 22 λ v
.
D
m
1 . 22 f λ
D
Now, combining Eqs. (10.26) and (10.28), we get
=
374
d min =
1.22 λ
2 tan β
(10.28)Wave Optics
1.22 λ
2 sin β
(10.29)
If the medium between the object and the objective lens is not air but
a medium of refractive index n, Eq. (10.29) gets modified to
d min =
1.22 λ
2 n sin β
(10.30)
The product n sin β is called the numerical aperture and is sometimes
marked on the objective.
The resolving power of the microscope is given by the reciprocal of
the minimum separation of two points seen as distinct. It can be seen
from Eq. (10.30) that the resolving power can be increased by choosing a
medium of higher refractive index. Usually an oil having a refractive index
close to that of the objective glass is used. Such an arrangement is called
an ‘oil immersion objective’. Notice that it is not possible to make sin β
larger than unity. Thus, we see that the resolving power of a microscope
is basically determined by the wavelength of the light used.
There is a likelihood of confusion between resolution and
magnification, and similarly between the role of a telescope and a
microscope to deal with these parameters. A telescope produces images
of far objects nearer to our eye. Therefore objects which are not resolved
at far distance, can be resolved by looking at them through a telescope.
A microscope, on the other hand, magnifies objects (which are near to
us) and produces their larger image. We may be looking at two stars or
two satellites of a far-away planet, or we may be looking at different
regions of a living cell. In this context, it is good to remember that a
telescope resolves whereas a microscope magnifies.
10.6.4 The validity of ray optics
An aperture (i.e., slit or hole) of size a illuminated by a parallel beam
sends diffracted light into an angle of approximately ≈ λ /a . This is the
angular size of the bright central maximum. In travelling a distance z,
the diffracted beam therefore acquires a width z λ /a due to diffraction. It
is interesting to ask at what value of z the spreading due to diffraction
becomes comparable to the size a of the aperture. We thus approximately
equate zλ/a with a. This gives the distance beyond which divergence of
the beam of width a becomes significant. Therefore,
z
a 2
λ
(10.31)
We define a quantity z F called the Fresnel distance by the following
equation
z F a 2 / λ
Equation (10.31) shows that for distances much smaller than z F , the
spreading due to diffraction is smaller compared to the size of the beam.
It becomes comparable when the distance is approximately z F . For
distances much greater than z F , the spreading due to diffraction
375Physics
dominates over that due to ray optics (i.e., the size a of the aperture).
Equation (10.31) also shows that ray optics is valid in the limit of
wavelength tending to zero.
Example 10.7 For what distance is ray optics a good approximation
when the aperture is 3 mm wide and the wavelength is 500 nm?
Solution z F =
a
2
λ
( 3 × 10 )
=
–3 2
5 × 10
–7
= 18 m
This example shows that even with a small aperture, diffraction
spreading can be neglected for rays many metres in length. Thus, ray
optics is valid in many common situations.
10.7 P OLARISATION
Consider holding a long string that is held horizontally, the other end of
which is assumed to be fixed. If we move the end of the string up and
down in a periodic manner, we will generate a wave propagating in the
+x direction (Fig. 10.21). Such a wave could be described by the following
equation
376
FIGURE 10.21 (a) The curves represent the displacement of a string at
t = 0 and at t = ∆t, respectively when a sinusoidal wave is propagating
in the +x-direction. (b) The curve represents the time variation
of the displacement at x = 0 when a sinusoidal wave is propagating
in the +x-direction. At x = ∆x, the time variation of the
displacement will be slightly displaced to the right.Wave Optics
y (x,t ) = a sin (kx – ω t)
(10.32)
where a and ω (= 2πν ) represent the amplitude and the angular frequency
of the wave, respectively; further,
2 π
(10.33)
k
represents the wavelength associated with the wave. We had discussed
propagation of such waves in Chapter 15 of Class XI textbook. Since the
displacement (which is along the y direction) is at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave, we have what is known as a
transverse wave. Also, since the displacement is in the y direction, it is
often referred to as a y-polarised wave. Since each point on the string
moves on a straight line, the wave is also referred to as a linearly polarised
wave. Further, the string always remains confined to the x-y plane and
therefore it is also referred to as a plane polarised wave.
In a similar manner we can consider the vibration of the string in the
x-z plane generating a z-polarised wave whose displacement will be given
by
λ =
z (x,t ) = a sin (kx – ω t )
(10.34)
It should be mentioned that the linearly polarised waves [described
by Eqs. (10.33) and (10.34)] are all transverse waves; i.e., the
displacement of each point of the string is always at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave. Finally, if the plane of vibration of
the string is changed randomly in very short intervals of time, then we
have what is known as an unpolarised wave. Thus, for an unpolarised
wave the displacement will be randomly changing with time though it
will always be perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
Light waves are transverse in nature; i.e., the electric field associated
with a propagating light wave is always at right angles to the direction of
propagation of the wave. This can be easily demonstrated using a simple
polaroid. You must have seen thin plastic like sheets, which are called
polaroids. A polaroid consists of long chain molecules aligned in a
particular direction. The electric vectors (associated with the propagating
light wave) along the direction of the aligned molecules get absorbed.
Thus, if an unpolarised light wave is incident on such a polaroid then
the light wave will get linearly polarised with the electric vector oscillating
along a direction perpendicular to the aligned molecules; this direction
is known as the pass-axis of the polaroid.
Thus, if the light from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) passes
through a polaroid sheet P 1, it is observed that its intensity is reduced by
half. Rotating P 1 has no effect on the transmitted beam and transmitted
intensity remains constant. Now, let an identical piece of polaroid P 2 be
placed before P 1 . As expected, the light from the lamp is reduced in
intensity on passing through P 2 alone. But now rotating P 1 has a dramatic
effect on the light coming from P 2 . In one position, the intensity transmitted
377Physics
by P 2 followed by P 1 is nearly zero. When turned by 90o from this position,
P 1 transmits nearly the full intensity emerging from P 2 (Fig. 10.22).
FIGURE 10.22 (a) Passage of light through two polaroids P 2 and P 1 . The
transmitted fraction falls from 1 to 0 as the angle between them varies
from 0o to 90o. Notice that the light seen through a single polaroid
P 1 does not vary with angle. (b) Behaviour of the electric vector
when light passes through two polaroids. The transmitted
polarisation is the component parallel to the polaroid axis.
The double arrows show the oscillations of the electric vector.
The above experiment can be easily understood by assuming that
light passing through the polaroid P 2 gets polarised along the pass-axis
of P 2 . If the pass-axis of P 2 makes an angle θ with the pass-axis of P 1 ,
then when the polarised beam passes through the polaroid P 2 , the
component E cos θ (along the pass-axis of P 2 ) will pass through P 2 .
Thus, as we rotate the polaroid P 1 (or P 2 ), the intensity will vary as:
I = I 0 cos 2 θ
(10.35)
378
where I 0 is the intensity of the polarized light after passing through
P 1 . This is known as Malus’ law. The above discussion shows that the
intensity coming out of a single polaroid is half of the incident intensity.
By putting a second polaroid, the intensity can be further controlled
from 50% to zero of the incident intensity by adjusting the angle between
the pass-axes of two polaroids.
Polaroids can be used to control the intensity, in sunglasses,
windowpanes, etc. Polaroids are also used in photographic cameras and
3D movie cameras.
Example 10.8 Discuss the intensity of transmitted light when a
polaroid sheet is rotated between two crossed polaroids?
Solution Let I 0 be the intensity of polarised light after passing through
the first polariser P 1 . Then the intensity of light after passing through
second polariser P 2 will be
I = I 0 cos 2 θ ,Wave Optics
 π

I = I 0 cos 2 θ cos 2  – θ 
 2

= I 0 cos 2 θ sin 2 θ =(I 0 /4) sin 2 2 θ
Therefore, the transmitted intensity will be maximum when θ = π/4.
where θ is the angle between pass axes of P 1 and P 2 . Since P 1 and P 3
are crossed the angle between the pass axes of P 2 and P 3 will be
(π/2 – θ ). Hence the intensity of light emerging from P 3 will be
10.7.1 Polarisation by scattering
The light from a clear blue portion of the sky shows a rise and fall of
intensity when viewed through a polaroid which is rotated. This is nothing
but sunlight, which has changed its direction (having been scattered) on
encountering the molecules of the earth’s atmosphere. As Fig. 10.23(a)
shows, the incident sunlight is unpolarised. The dots stand for polarisation
perpendicular to the plane of the figure. The double arrows show
polarisation in the plane of the figure. (There is no phase relation between
these two in unpolarised light). Under the influence of the electric field of
the incident wave the electrons in the molecules acquire components of
motion in both these directions. We have drawn an observer looking at
90° to the direction of the sun. Clearly, charges accelerating parallel to
the double arrows do not radiate energy towards this observer since their
acceleration has no transverse component. The radiation scattered by
the molecule is therefore represented by dots. It is polarised
perpendicular to the plane of the figure. This explains the polarisation of
scattered light from the sky.
FIGURE 10.23 (a) Polarisation of the blue scattered light from the sky.
The incident sunlight is unpolarised (dots and arrows). A typical
molecule is shown. It scatters light by 90o polarised normal to
the plane of the paper (dots only). (b) Polarisation of light
reflected from a transparent medium at the Brewster angle
(reflected ray perpendicular to refracted ray).
The scattering of light by molecules was intensively investigated by
C.V. Raman and his collaborators in Kolkata in the 1920s. Raman was
awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1930 for this work.
379Physics
A
SPECIAL CASE OF TOTAL TRANSMISSION
When light is incident on an interface of two media, it is observed that some part of it
gets reflected and some part gets transmitted. Consider a related question: Is it possible
that under some conditions a monochromatic beam of light incident on a surface
(which is normally reflective) gets completely transmitted with no reflection? To your
surprise, the answer is yes.
Let us try a simple experiment and check what happens. Arrange a laser, a good
polariser, a prism and screen as shown in the figure here.
Let the light emitted by the laser source pass through the polariser and be incident
on the surface of the prism at the Brewster’s angle of incidence i B . Now rotate the
polariser carefully and you will observe that for a specific alignment of the polariser, the
light incident on the prism is completely transmitted and no light is reflected from the
surface of the prism. The reflected spot will completely vanish.
10.7.2 Polarisation by reflection
Figure 10.23(b) shows light reflected from a transparent medium, say,
water. As before, the dots and arrows indicate that both polarisations are
present in the incident and refracted waves. We have drawn a situation
in which the reflected wave travels at right angles to the refracted wave.
The oscillating electrons in the water produce the reflected wave. These
move in the two directions transverse to the radiation from wave in the
medium, i.e., the refracted wave. The arrows are parallel to the direction
of the reflected wave. Motion in this direction does not contribute to the
reflected wave. As the figure shows, the reflected light is therefore linearly
polarised perpendicular to the plane of the figure (represented by dots).
This can be checked by looking at the reflected light through an analyser.
The transmitted intensity will be zero when the axis of the analyser is in
the plane of the figure, i.e., the plane of incidence.
When unpolarised light is incident on the boundary between two
transparent media, the reflected light is polarised with its electric vector
perpendicular to the plane of incidence when the refracted and reflected
rays make a right angle with each other. Thus we have seen that when
reflected wave is perpendicular to the refracted wave, the reflected wave
is a totally polarised wave. The angle of incidence in this case is called
Brewster’s angle and is denoted by i B . We can see that i B is related to the
refractive index of the denser medium. Since we have i B +r = π/2, we get
from Snell’s law
380
μ =
sin i B
sin i B
=
sin r
sin ( π / 2 – i B )Wave Optics
=
sin i B
= tan i B
cos i B
(10.36)
This is known as Brewster’s law.
Solution For i + r to be equal to π/2, we should have tan i B = μ = 1.5.
This gives i B = 57°. This is the Brewster’s angle for air to glass
interface.
Example 10.9 Unpolarised light is incident on a plane glass surface.
What should be the angle of incidence so that the reflected and
refracted rays are perpendicular to each other?
For simplicity, we have discussed scattering of light by 90o, and
reflection at the Brewster angle. In this special situation, one of the two
perpendicular components of the electric field is zero. At other angles,
both components are present but one is stronger than the other. There is
no stable phase relationship between the two perpendicular components
since these are derived from two perpendicular components of an
unpolarised beam. When such light is viewed through a rotating analyser,
one sees a maximum and a minimum of intensity but not complete
darkness. This kind of light is called partially polarised.
Let us try to understand the situation. When an unpolarised beam of
light is incident at the Brewster’s angle on an interface of two media, only
part of light with electric field vector perpendicular to the plane of
incidence will be reflected. Now by using a good polariser, if we completely
remove all the light with its electric vector perpendicular to the plane of
incidence and let this light be incident on the surface of the prism at
Brewster’s angle, you will then observe no reflection and there will be
total transmission of light.
We began this chapter by pointing out that there are some phenomena
which can be explained only by the wave theory. In order to develop a
proper understanding, we first described how some phenomena like
reflection and refraction, which were studied on this basis of Ray Optics
in Chapter 9, can also be understood on the basis of Wave Optics. Then
we described Young’s double slit experiment which was a turning point
in the study of optics. Finally, we described some associated points such
as diffraction, resolution, polarisation, and validity of ray optics. In the
next chapter, you will see how new experiments led to new theories at
the turn of the century around 1900 A.D.
SUMMARY
1.
2.
Huygens’ principle tells us that each point on a wavefront is a source
of secondary waves, which add up to give the wavefront at a later time.
Huygens’ construction tells us that the new wavefront is the forward
envelope of the secondary waves. When the speed of light is
independent of direction, the secondary waves are spherical. The rays
are then perpendicular to both the wavefronts and the time of travel
381Physics
3.
4.
5.
6.
is the same measured along any ray. This principle leads to the well
known laws of reflection and refraction.
The principle of superposition of waves applies whenever two or more
sources of light illuminate the same point. When we consider the
intensity of light due to these sources at the given point, there is an
interference term in addition to the sum of the individual intensities.
But this term is important only if it has a non-zero average, which
occurs only if the sources have the same frequency and a stable
phase difference.
Young’s double slit of separation d gives equally spaced fringes of
angular separation λ /d. The source, mid-point of the slits, and central
bright fringe lie in a straight line. An extended source will destroy
the fringes if it subtends angle more than λ /d at the slits.
A single slit of width a gives a diffraction pattern with a central
λ 2 λ
, etc.,
maximum. The intensity falls to zero at angles of ± , ±
a
a
with successively weaker secondary maxima in between. Diffraction
limits the angular resolution of a telescope to λ /D where D is the
diameter. Two stars closer than this give strongly overlapping images.
Similarly, a microscope objective subtending angle 2 β at the focus,
in a medium of refractive index n, will just separate two objects spaced
at a distance λ /(2n sin β ), which is the resolution limit of a
microscope. Diffraction determines the limitations of the concept of
light rays. A beam of width a travels a distance a 2 / λ , called the Fresnel
distance, before it starts to spread out due to diffraction.
Natural light, e.g., from the sun is unpolarised. This means the electric
vector takes all possible directions in the transverse plane, rapidly
and randomly, during a measurement. A polaroid transmits only one
component (parallel to a special axis). The resulting light is called
linearly polarised or plane polarised. When this kind of light is viewed
through a second polaroid whose axis turns through 2π, two maxima
and minima of intensity are seen. Polarised light can also be produced
by reflection at a special angle (called the Brewster angle) and by
scattering through π/2 in the earth’s atmosphere.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
382
Waves from a point source spread out in all directions, while light was
seen to travel along narrow rays. It required the insight and experiment
of Huygens, Young and Fresnel to understand how a wave theory could
explain all aspects of the behaviour of light.
The crucial new feature of waves is interference of amplitudes from different
sources which can be both constructive and destructive, as shown in
Young’s experiment.
Even a wave falling on single slit should be regarded as a large number of
sources which interefere constructively in the forward direction ( θ = 0),
and destructively in other directions.
Diffraction phenomena define the limits of ray optics. The limit of the
ability of microscopes and telescopes to distinguish very close objects is
set by the wavelength of light.
Most interference and diffraction effects exist even for longitudinal waves
like sound in air. But polarisation phenomena are special to transverse
waves like light waves.Wave Optics
EXERCISES
10.1 Monochromatic light of wavelength 589 nm is incident from air on a
water surface. What are the wavelength, frequency and speed of
(a) reflected, and (b) refracted light? Refractive index of water is
1.33.
10.2 What is the shape of the wavefront in each of the following cases:
(a) Light diverging from a point source.
(b) Light emerging out of a convex lens when a point source is placed
at its focus.
(c) The portion of the wavefront of light from a distant star intercepted
by the Earth.
10.3
(a) The refractive index of glass is 1.5. What is the speed of light in
glass? (Speed of light in vacuum is 3.0 × 10 8 m s –1 )
(b) Is the speed of light in glass independent of the colour of light? If
not, which of the two colours red and violet travels slower in a
glass prism?
10.4 In a Young’s double-slit experiment, the slits are separated by
0.28 mm and the screen is placed 1.4 m away. The distance between
the central bright fringe and the fourth bright fringe is measured
to be 1.2 cm. Determine the wavelength of light used in the
experiment.
10.5 In Young’s double-slit experiment using monochromatic light of
wavelength λ , the intensity of light at a point on the screen where
path difference is λ , is K units. What is the intensity of light at a
point where path difference is λ /3 ?
10.6 A beam of light consisting of two wavelengths, 650 nm and 520 nm,
is used to obtain interference fringes in a Young’s double-slit
experiment.
(a) Find the distance of the third bright fringe on the screen from
the central maximum for wavelength 650 nm.
(b) What is the least distance from the central maximum where the
bright fringes due to both the wavelengths coincide?
10.7 In a double-slit experiment the angular width of a fringe is found to
be 0.2° on a screen placed 1 m away. The wavelength of light used is
600 nm. What will be the angular width of the fringe if the entire
experimental apparatus is immersed in water? Take refractive index
of water to be 4/3.
10.8 What is the Brewster angle for air to glass transition? (Refractive
index of glass = 1.5.)
10.9 Light of wavelength 5000 Å falls on a plane reflecting surface. What
are the wavelength and frequency of the reflected light? For what
angle of incidence is the reflected ray normal to the incident ray?
10.10 Estimate the distance for which ray optics is good approximation
for an aperture of 4 mm and wavelength 400 nm.
383Physics
ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
10.11 The 6563 Å Hα line emitted by hydrogen in a star is found to be red-
shifted by 15 Å. Estimate the speed with which the star is receding
from the Earth.
10.12 Explain how Corpuscular theory predicts the speed of light in a
medium, say, water, to be greater than the speed of light in vacuum.
Is the prediction confirmed by experimental determination of the
speed of light in water ? If not, which alternative picture of light is
consistent with experiment?
10.13 You have learnt in the text how Huygens’ principle leads to the laws
of reflection and refraction. Use the same principle to deduce directly
that a point object placed in front of a plane mirror produces a
virtual image whose distance from the mirror is equal to the object
distance from the mirror.
10.14 Let us list some of the factors, which could possibly influence the
speed of wave propagation:
(i) nature of the source.
(ii) direction of propagation.
(iii) motion of the source and/or observer.
(iv) wavelength.
(v) intensity of the wave.
On which of these factors, if any, does
(a) the speed of light in vacuum,
(b) the speed of light in a medium (say, glass or water),
depend ?
10.15 For sound waves, the Doppler formula for frequency shift differs
slightly between the two situations: (i) source at rest; observer
moving, and (ii) source moving; observer at rest. The exact Doppler
formulas for the case of light waves in vacuum are, however, strictly
identical for these situations. Explain why this should be so. Would
you expect the formulas to be strictly identical for the two situations
in case of light travelling in a medium?
10.16 In double-slit experiment using light of wavelength 600 nm, the
angular width of a fringe formed on a distant screen is 0.1o. What is
the spacing between the two slits?
10.17 Answer the following questions:
(a) In a single slit diffraction experiment, the width of the slit is
made double the original width. How does this affect the size
and intensity of the central diffraction band?
(b) In what way is diffraction from each slit related to the
interference pattern in a double-slit experiment ?
(c) When a tiny circular obstacle is placed in the path of light from
a distant source, a bright spot is seen at the centre of the shadow
of the obstacle. Explain why?
384
(d) Two students are separated by a 7 m partition wall in a room
10 m high. If both light and sound waves can bend aroundWave Optics
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
obstacles, how is it that the students are unable to see each
other even though they can converse easily.
(e) Ray optics is based on the assumption that light travels in a
straight line. Diffraction effects (observed when light propagates
through small apertures/slits or around small obstacles)
disprove this assumption. Yet the ray optics assumption is so
commonly used in understanding location and several other
properties of images in optical instruments. What is the
justification?
Two towers on top of two hills are 40 km apart. The line joining
them passes 50 m above a hill halfway between the towers. What is
the longest wavelength of radio waves, which can be sent between
the towers without appreciable diffraction effects?
A parallel beam of light of wavelength 500 nm falls on a narrow slit
and the resulting diffraction pattern is observed on a screen 1 m
away. It is observed that the first minimum is at a distance of 2.5
mm from the centre of the screen. Find the width of the slit.
Answer the following questions:
(a) When a low flying aircraft passes overhead, we sometimes notice
a slight shaking of the picture on our TV screen. Suggest a
possible explanation.
(b) As you have learnt in the text, the principle of linear
superposition of wave displacement is basic to understanding
intensity distributions in diffraction and interference patterns.
What is the justification of this principle?
In deriving the single slit diffraction pattern, it was stated that the
intensity is zero at angles of n λ /a. Justify this by suitably dividing
the slit to bring out the cancellation.
385
Physics
Chapter Eleven
DUAL NATURE OF
RADIATION AND
MATTER
11.1 I NTRODUCTION
386
The Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism and Hertz experiments on
the generation and detection of electromagnetic waves in 1887 strongly
established the wave nature of light. Towards the same period at the end
of 19th century, experimental investigations on conduction of electricity
(electric discharge) through gases at low pressure in a discharge tube led
to many historic discoveries. The discovery of X-rays by Roentgen in 1895,
and of electron by J. J. Thomson in 1897, were important milestones in
the understanding of atomic structure. It was found that at sufficiently
low pressure of about 0.001 mm of mercury column, a discharge took
place between the two electrodes on applying the electric field to the gas
in the discharge tube. A fluorescent glow appeared on the glass opposite
to cathode. The colour of glow of the glass depended on the type of glass,
it being yellowish-green for soda glass. The cause of this fluorescence
was attributed to the radiation which appeared to be coming from the
cathode. These cathode rays were discovered, in 1870, by William
Crookes who later, in 1879, suggested that these rays consisted of streams
of fast moving negatively charged particles. The British physicist
J. J. Thomson (1856 -1940) confirmed this hypothesis. By applying
mutually perpendicular electric and magnetic fields across the discharge
tube, J. J. Thomson was the first to determine experimentally the speed
and the specific charge [charge to mass ratio (e/m )] of the cathode rayDual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
particles. They were found to travel with speeds ranging from about 0.1
to 0.2 times the speed of light (3 ×10 8 m/s). The presently accepted value
of e/m is 1.76 × 10 11 C/kg. Further, the value of e/m was found to be
independent of the nature of the material/metal used as the cathode
(emitter), or the gas introduced in the discharge tube. This observation
suggested the universality of the cathode ray particles.
Around the same time, in 1887, it was found that certain metals, when
irradiated by ultraviolet light, emitted negatively charged particles having
small speeds. Also, certain metals when heated to a high temperature were
found to emit negatively charged particles. The value of e/m of these particles
was found to be the same as that for cathode ray particles. These
observations thus established that all these particles, although produced
under different conditions, were identical in nature. J. J. Thomson, in 1897,
named these particles as electrons, and suggested that they were
fundamental, universal constituents of matter. For his epoch-making
discovery of electron, through his theoretical and experimental
investigations on conduction of electricity by gasses, he was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1906. In 1913, the American physicist R. A.
Millikan (1868 -1953) performed the pioneering oil-drop experiment for
the precise measurement of the charge on an electron. He found that the
charge on an oil-droplet was always an integral multiple of an elementary
charge, 1.602 × 10 –19 C. Millikan’s experiment established that electric
charge is quantised. From the values of charge (e ) and specific charge
(e/m ), the mass (m) of the electron could be determined.
11.2 E LECTRON E MISSION
We know that metals have free electrons (negatively charged particles) that
are responsible for their conductivity. However, the free electrons cannot
normally escape out of the metal surface. If an electron attempts to come
out of the metal, the metal surface acquires a positive charge and pulls the
electron back to the metal. The free electron is thus held inside the metal
surface by the attractive forces of the ions. Consequently, the electron can
come out of the metal surface only if it has got sufficient energy to overcome
the attractive pull. A certain minimum amount of energy is required to be
given to an electron to pull it out from the surface of the metal. This
minimum energy required by an electron to escape from the metal surface
is called the work function of the metal. It is generally denoted by φ 0 and
measured in eV (electron volt). One electron volt is the energy gained by an
electron when it has been accelerated by a potential difference of 1 volt, so
that 1 eV = 1.602 ×10 –19 J.
This unit of energy is commonly used in atomic and nuclear physics.
The work function ( φ 0 ) depends on the properties of the metal and the
nature of its surface. The values of work function of some metals are
given in Table 11.1. These values are approximate as they are very
sensitive to surface impurities.
Note from Table 11.1 that the work function of platinum is the highest
( φ 0 = 5.65 eV) while it is the lowest ( φ 0 = 2.14 eV ) for caesium.
The minimum energy required for the electron emission from the metal
surface can be supplied to the free electrons by any one of the following
physical processes:
387Physics
T ABLE 11.1 W ORK FUNCTIONS OF SOME METALS
Metal Work function
φ ο (eV) Metal Work function
φ ο (eV)
Cs 2.14 Al 4.28
K 2.30 Hg 4.49
Na 2.75 Cu 4.65
Ca 3.20 Ag 4.70
Mo 4.17 Ni 5.15
Pb 4.25 Pt 5.65
(i) Thermionic emission: By suitably heating, sufficient thermal energy
can be imparted to the free electrons to enable them to come out of the
metal.
(ii) Field emission : By applying a very strong electric field (of the order of
10 8 V m –1 ) to a metal, electrons can be pulled out of the metal, as in a
spark plug.
(iii) Photo-electric emission : When light of suitable frequency illuminates
a metal surface, electrons are emitted from the metal surface. These
photo(light)-generated electrons are called photoelectrons.
11.3 P HOTOELECTRIC E FFECT
11.3.1 Hertz’s observations
The phenomenon of photoelectric emission was discovered in 1887 by
Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894), during his electromagnetic wave experiments.
In his experimental investigation on the production of electromagnetic
waves by means of a spark discharge, Hertz observed that high voltage
sparks across the detector loop were enhanced when the emitter plate
was illuminated by ultraviolet light from an arc lamp.
Light shining on the metal surface somehow facilitated the escape of
free, charged particles which we now know as electrons. When light falls
on a metal surface, some electrons near the surface absorb enough energy
from the incident radiation to overcome the attraction of the positive ions
in the material of the surface. After gaining sufficient energy from the
incident light, the electrons escape from the surface of the metal into the
surrounding space.
11.3.2 Hallwachs’ and Lenard’s observations
388
Wilhelm Hallwachs and Philipp Lenard investigated the phenomenon of
photoelectric emission in detail during 1886-1902.
Lenard (1862-1947) observed that when ultraviolet radiations were
allowed to fall on the emitter plate of an evacuated glass tube enclosing
two electrodes (metal plates), current flows in the circuit (Fig. 11.1). As
soon as the ultraviolet radiations were stopped, the current flow alsoDual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
OF
11.4 E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
E FFECT
stopped. These observations indicate that when ultraviolet radiations fall
on the emitter plate C, electrons are ejected from it which are attracted
towards the positive, collector plate A by the electric field. The electrons
flow through the evacuated glass tube, resulting in the current flow. Thus,
light falling on the surface of the emitter causes current in the external
circuit. Hallwachs and Lenard studied how this photo current varied with
collector plate potential, and with frequency and intensity of incident light.
Hallwachs, in 1888, undertook the study further and connected a
negatively charged zinc plate to an electroscope. He observed that the
zinc plate lost its charge when it was illuminated by ultraviolet light.
Further, the uncharged zinc plate became positively charged when it was
irradiated by ultraviolet light. Positive charge on a positively charged
zinc plate was found to be further enhanced when it was illuminated by
ultraviolet light. From these observations he concluded that negatively
charged particles were emitted from the zinc plate under the action of
ultraviolet light.
After the discovery of the electron in 1897, it became evident that the
incident light causes electrons to be emitted from the emitter plate. Due
to negative charge, the emitted electrons are pushed towards the collector
plate by the electric field. Hallwachs and Lenard also observed that when
ultraviolet light fell on the emitter plate, no electrons were emitted at all
when the frequency of the incident light was smaller than a certain
minimum value, called the threshold frequency. This minimum frequency
depends on the nature of the material of the emitter plate.
It was found that certain metals like zinc, cadmium, magnesium, etc.,
responded only to ultraviolet light, having short wavelength, to cause
electron emission from the surface. However, some alkali metals such as
lithium, sodium, potassium, caesium and rubidium were sensitive
even to visible light. All these photosensitive substances emit electrons
when they are illuminated by light. After the discovery of electrons, these
electrons were termed as photoelectrons. The phenomenon is called
photoelectric effect.
P HOTOELECTRIC
Figure 11.1 depicts a schematic view of the arrangement used for the
experimental study of the photoelectric effect. It consists of an evacuated
glass/quartz tube having a photosensitive plate C and another metal
plate A. Monochromatic light from the source S of sufficiently short
wavelength passes through the window W and falls on the photosensitive
plate C (emitter). A transparent quartz window is sealed on to the glass
tube, which permits ultraviolet radiation to pass through it and irradiate
the photosensitive plate C. The electrons are emitted by the plate C and
are collected by the plate A (collector), by the electric field created by the
battery. The battery maintains the potential difference between the plates
C and A, that can be varied. The polarity of the plates C and A can be
reversed by a commutator. Thus, the plate A can be maintained at a desired
positive or negative potential with respect to emitter C. When the collector
plate A is positive with respect to the emitter plate C, the electrons are
389Physics
FIGURE 11.1 Experimental
arrangement for study of
photoelectric effect.
attracted to it. The emission of electrons causes flow of
electric current in the circuit. The potential difference
between the emitter and collector plates is measured by
a voltmeter (V) whereas the resulting photo current
flowing in the circuit is measured by a microammeter
(μA). The photoelectric current can be increased or
decreased by varying the potential of collector plate A
with respect to the emitter plate C. The intensity and
frequency of the incident light can be varied, as can the
potential difference V between the emitter C and the
collector A.
We can use the experimental arrangement of
Fig. 11.1 to study the variation of photocurrent with
(a) intensity of radiation, (b) frequency of incident
radiation, (c) the potential difference between the
plates A and C, and (d) the nature of the material
of plate C. Light of different frequencies can be used
by putting appropriate coloured filter or coloured
glass in the path of light falling on the emitter C. The intensity
of light is varied by changing the distance of the light source
from the emitter.
11.4.1 Effect of intensity of light on photocurrent
FIGURE 11.2 Variation of
Photoelectric current with
intensity of light.
The collector A is maintained at a positive potential with
respect to emitter C so that electrons ejected from C are
attracted towards collector A. Keeping the frequency of the
incident radiation and the accelerating potential fixed, the
intensity of light is varied and the resulting photoelectric
current is measured each time. It is found that the
photocurrent increases linearly with intensity of incident light
as shown graphically in Fig. 11.2. The photocurrent is directly
proportional to the number of photoelectrons emitted per
second. This implies that the number of photoelectrons
emitted per second is directly proportional to the intensity
of incident radiation.
11.4.2 Effect of potential on photoelectric current
390
We first keep the plate A at some positive accelerating potential with respect
to the plate C and illuminate the plate C with light of fixed frequency ν
and fixed intensity I 1 . We next vary the positive potential of plate A gradually
and measure the resulting photocurrent each time. It is found that the
photoelectric current increases with increase in accelerating (positive)
potential. At some stage, for a certain positive potential of plate A, all the
emitted electrons are collected by the plate A and the photoelectric current
becomes maximum or saturates. If we increase the accelerating potential
of plate A further, the photocurrent does not increase. This maximum
value of the photoelectric current is called saturation current. Saturation
current corresponds to the case when all the photoelectrons emitted by
the emitter plate C reach the collector plate A.
We now apply a negative (retarding) potential to the plate A with respect
to the plate C and make it increasingly negative gradually. When theDual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
polarity is reversed, the electrons are
repelled and only the most energetic
electrons are able to reach the collector A.
The photocurrent is found to decrease
rapidly until it drops to zero at a certain
sharply defined, critical value of the negative
potential V 0 on the plate A. For a particular
frequency of incident radiation, the
minimum negative (retarding) potential V 0
given to the plate A for which the
photocurrent stops or becomes zero is
called the cut-off or stopping potential.
The interpretation of the observation in
terms of photoelectrons is straightforward.
All the photoelectrons emitted from the
metal do not have the same energy.
FIGURE 11.3 Variation of photocurrent with
Photoelectric current is zero when the
collector plate potential for different
stopping potential is sufficient to repel even
intensity of incident radiation.
the most energetic photoelectrons, with the
maximum kinetic energy (K max ), so that
K max = e V 0
(11.1)
We can now repeat this experiment with incident radiation of the same
frequency but of higher intensity I 2 and I 3 (I 3 > I 2 > I 1 ). We note that the
saturation currents are now found to be at higher values. This shows
that more electrons are being emitted per second, proportional to the
intensity of incident radiation. But the stopping potential remains the
same as that for the incident radiation of intensity I 1 , as shown graphically
in Fig. 11.3. Thus, for a given frequency of the incident radiation, the
stopping potential is independent of its intensity. In other words, the
maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons depends on the light source
and the emitter plate material, but is independent of intensity of incident
radiation.
11.4.3 Effect of frequency of incident radiation on stopping
potential
We now study the relation between the
frequency ν of the incident radiation and the
stopping potential V 0 . We suitably adjust the
same intensity of light radiation at various
frequencies and study the variation of
photocurrent with collector plate potential. The
resulting variation is shown in Fig. 11.4. We
obtain different values of stopping potential but
the same value of the saturation current for
incident radiation of different frequencies. The
energy of the emitted electrons depends on the
frequency of the incident radiations. The
stopping potential is more negative for higher
frequencies of incident radiation. Note from
FIGURE 11.4 Variation of photoelectric current
with collector plate potential for different
frequencies of incident radiation.
391Physics
Fig. 11.4 that the stopping potentials are in the
order V 03 > V 02 > V 01 if the frequencies are in the
order ν 3 > ν 2 > ν 1 . This implies that greater the
frequency of incident light, greater is the
maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons.
Consequently, we need greater retarding
potential to stop them completely. If we plot a
graph between the frequency of incident radiation
and the corresponding stopping potential for
different metals we get a straight line, as shown
in Fig. 11.5.
The graph shows that
FIGURE 11.5 Variation of stopping potential V 0
with frequency ν of incident radiation for a
(i) the stopping potential V 0 varies linearly with
given photosensitive material.
the frequency of incident radiation for a given
photosensitive material.
(ii) there exists a certain minimum cut-off frequency ν 0 for which the
stopping potential is zero.
These observations have two implications:
(i) The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons varies linearly
with the frequency of incident radiation, but is independent of its
intensity.
(ii) For a frequency ν of incident radiation, lower than the cut-off
frequency ν 0 , no photoelectric emission is possible even if the
intensity is large.
This minimum, cut-off frequency ν 0 , is called the threshold frequency.
It is different for different metals.
Different photosensitive materials respond differently to light. Selenium
is more sensitive than zinc or copper. The same photosensitive substance
gives different response to light of different wavelengths. For example,
ultraviolet light gives rise to photoelectric effect in copper while green or
red light does not.
Note that in all the above experiments, it is found that, if frequency of
the incident radiation exceeds the threshold frequency, the photoelectric
emission starts instantaneously without any apparent time lag, even if
the incident radiation is very dim. It is now known that emission starts in
a time of the order of 10 – 9 s or less.
We now summarise the experimental features and observations
described in this section.
(i) For a given photosensitive material and frequency of incident radiation
(above the threshold frequency), the photoelectric current is directly
proportional to the intensity of incident light (Fig. 11.2).
(ii) For a given photosensitive material and frequency of incident radiation,
saturation current is found to be proportional to the intensity of
incident radiation whereas the stopping potential is independent of
its intensity (Fig. 11.3).
(iii) For a given photosensitive material, there exists a certain minimum
cut-off frequency of the incident radiation, called the threshold
frequency, below which no emission of photoelectrons takes place,
no matter how intense the incident light is. Above the threshold
392
frequency, the stopping potential or equivalently the maximum kineticDual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
energy of the emitted photoelectrons increases linearly with the
frequency of the incident radiation, but is independent of its intensity
(Fig. 11.5).
(iv) The photoelectric emission is an instantaneous process without any
apparent time lag (∼10 – 9 s or less), even when the incident radiation is
made exceedingly dim.
11.5 P HOTOELECTRIC E FFECT
OF L IGHT
AND
W AVE T HEORY
The wave nature of light was well established by the end of the nineteenth
century. The phenomena of interference, diffraction and polarisation were
explained in a natural and satisfactory way by the wave picture of light.
According to this picture, light is an electromagnetic wave consisting of
electric and magnetic fields with continuous distribution of energy over
the region of space over which the wave is extended. Let us now see if this
wave picture of light can explain the observations on photoelectric
emission given in the previous section.
According to the wave picture of light, the free electrons at the surface
of the metal (over which the beam of radiation falls) absorb the radiant
energy continuously. The greater the intensity of radiation, the greater are
the amplitude of electric and magnetic fields. Consequently, the greater
the intensity, the greater should be the energy absorbed by each electron.
In this picture, the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons on the
surface is then expected to increase with increase in intensity. Also, no
matter what the frequency of radiation is, a sufficiently intense beam of
radiation (over sufficient time) should be able to impart enough energy to
the electrons, so that they exceed the minimum energy needed to escape
from the metal surface . A threshold frequency, therefore, should not exist.
These expectations of the wave theory directly contradict observations (i),
(ii) and (iii) given at the end of sub-section 11.4.3.
Further, we should note that in the wave picture, the absorption of
energy by electron takes place continuously over the entire
wavefront of the radiation. Since a large number of electrons absorb energy,
the energy absorbed per electron per unit time turns out to be small.
Explicit calculations estimate that it can take hours or more for a single
electron to pick up sufficient energy to overcome the work function and
come out of the metal. This conclusion is again in striking contrast to
observation (iv) that the photoelectric emission is instantaneous. In short,
the wave picture is unable to explain the most basic features of
photoelectric emission.
11.6 E INSTEIN ’ S P HOTOELECTRIC E QUATION : E NERGY
Q UANTUM OF R ADIATION
In 1905, Albert Einstein (1879 -1955) proposed a radically new picture
of electromagnetic radiation to explain photoelectric effect. In this picture,
photoelectric emission does not take place by continuous absorption of
energy from radiation. Radiation energy is built up of discrete units – the
so called quanta of energy of radiation. Each quantum of radiant energy
393Physics
394
Albert Einstein (1879 –
1955) Einstein, one of the
greatest physicists of all
time, was born in Ulm,
Germany. In 1905, he
published three path-
breaking papers. In the
first paper, he introduced
the notion of light quanta
(now called photons) and
used it to explain the
features of photoelectric
effect. In the second paper,
he developed a theory of
Brownian
motion,
confirmed experimentally a
few years later and provided
a convincing evidence of
the atomic picture of matter.
The third paper gave birth
to the special theory of
relativity. In 1916, he
published the general
theory of relativity. Some of
Einstein’s most significant
later contributions are: the
notion
of
stimulated
emission introduced in an
alternative derivation of
Planck’s
blackbody
radiation law, static model
of the universe which
started modern cosmology,
quantum statistics of a gas
of massive bosons, and a
critical analysis of the
foundations of quantum
mechanics. In 1921, he was
awarded the Nobel Prize in
physics for his contribution
to theoretical physics and
the photoelectric effect.
has energy h ν , where h is Planck’s constant and ν the
frequency of light. In photoelectric effect, an electron
absorbs a quantum of energy (h ν ) of radiation. If this
quantum of energy absorbed exceeds the minimum
energy needed for the electron to escape from the metal
surface (work function φ 0 ), the electron is emitted with
maximum kinetic energy
K max = h ν – φ 0
(11.2)
More tightly bound electrons will emerge with kinetic
energies less than the maximum value. Note that the
intensity of light of a given frequency is determined by
the number of photons incident per second. Increasing
the intensity will increase the number of emitted electrons
per second. However, the maximum kinetic energy of the
emitted photoelectrons is determined by the energy of each
photon.
Equation (11.2) is known as Einstein’s photoelectric
equation. We now see how this equation accounts in a
simple and elegant manner all the observations on
photoelectric effect given at the end of sub-section 11.4.3.
• According to Eq. (11.2), K max depends linearly on ν ,
and is independent of intensity of radiation, in
agreement with observation. This has happened
because in Einstein’s picture, photoelectric effect arises
from the absorption of a single quantum of radiation
by a single electron. The intensity of radiation (that is
proportional to the number of energy quanta per unit
area per unit time) is irrelevant to this basic process.
• Since K max must be non-negative, Eq. (11.2 ) implies
that photoelectric emission is possible only if
h ν > φ 0
or ν > ν 0 , where
ν 0 =
•
φ 0
(11.3)
h
Equation (11.3) shows that the greater the work
function φ 0 , the higher the minimum or threshold
frequency ν 0 needed to emit photoelectrons. Thus,
there exists a threshold frequency ν 0 (= φ 0 /h) for the
metal surface, below which no photoelectric emission
is possible, no matter how intense the incident
radiation may be or how long it falls on the surface.
In this picture, intensity of radiation as noted above,
is proportional to the number of energy quanta per
unit area per unit time. The greater the number of
energy quanta available, the greater is the number of
electrons absorbing the energy quanta and greater,
therefore, is the number of electrons coming out of
the metal (for ν > ν 0 ). This explains why, for ν > ν 0 ,
photoelectric current is proportional to intensity.Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
•
In Einstein’s picture, the basic elementary process involved in
photoelectric effect is the absorption of a light quantum by an electron.
This process is instantaneous. Thus, whatever may be the intensity
i.e., the number of quanta of radiation per unit area per unit time,
photoelectric emission is instantaneous. Low intensity does not mean
delay in emission, since the basic elementary process is the same.
Intensity only determines how many electrons are able to participate
in the elementary process (absorption of a light quantum by a single
electron) and, therefore, the photoelectric current.
Using Eq. (11.1), the photoelectric equation, Eq. (11.2), can be
written as
e V 0 = h ν – φ 0 ; for ν ≥ ν 0
φ
h
or V 0 =     ν − 0
(11.4)
 e 
e
This is an important result. It predicts that the V 0 versus ν curve is a
straight line with slope = (h/e), independent of the nature of the material.
During 1906-1916, Millikan performed a series of experiments on
photoelectric effect, aimed at disproving Einstein’s photoelectric equation.
He measured the slope of the straight line obtained for sodium, similar to
that shown in Fig. 11.5. Using the known value of e, he determined the
value of Planck’s constant h. This value was close to the value of Planck’s
contant (= 6.626 × 10 –34 J s) determined in an entirely different context.
In this way, in 1916, Millikan proved the validity of Einstein’s photoelectric
equation, instead of disproving it.
The successful explanation of photoelectric effect using the hypothesis
of light quanta and the experimental determination of values of h and φ 0 ,
in agreement with values obtained from other experiments, led to the
acceptance of Einstein’s picture of photoelectric effect. Millikan verified
photoelectric equation with great precision, for a number of alkali metals
over a wide range of radiation frequencies.
11.7 P ARTICLE N ATURE
OF
L IGHT : T HE P HOTON
Photoelectric effect thus gave evidence to the strange fact that light in
interaction with matter behaved as if it was made of quanta or packets of
energy, each of energy h ν .
Is the light quantum of energy to be associated with a particle? Einstein
arrived at the important result, that the light quantum can also be
associated with momentum (h ν /c ). A definite value of energy as well as
momentum is a strong sign that the light quantum can be associated
with a particle. This particle was later named photon. The particle-like
behaviour of light was further confirmed, in 1924, by the experiment of
A.H. Compton (1892-1962) on scattering of X-rays from electrons. In
1921, Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contribution
to theoretical physics and the photoelectric effect. In 1923, Millikan was
awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for his work on the elementary
charge of electricity and on the photoelectric effect.
We can summarise the photon picture of electromagnetic radiation
as follows:
395Physics
(i) In interaction of radiation with matter, radiation behaves as if it is
made up of particles called photons.
(ii) Each photon has energy E (=h ν ) and momentum p (= h ν /c), and
speed c, the speed of light.
(iii) All photons of light of a particular frequency ν , or wavelength λ , have
the same energy E (=h ν = hc/ λ ) and momentum p (= h ν /c = h/ λ ),
whatever the intensity of radiation may be. By increasing the intensity
of light of given wavelength, there is only an increase in the number of
photons per second crossing a given area, with each photon having
the same energy. Thus, photon energy is independent of intensity of
radiation.
(iv) Photons are electrically neutral and are not deflected by electric and
magnetic fields.
(v) In a photon-particle collision (such as photon-electron collision), the
total energy and total momentum are conserved. However, the number
of photons may not be conserved in a collision. The photon may be
absorbed or a new photon may be created.
Example 11.1 Monochromatic light of frequency 6.0 ×10 14 Hz is
produced by a laser. The power emitted is 2.0 ×10 –3 W. (a) What is the
energy of a photon in the light beam? (b) How many photons per second,
on an average, are emitted by the source?
Solution
(a) Each photon has an energy
E = h ν = ( 6.63 ×10 –34 J s) (6.0 ×10 14 Hz)
= 3.98 × 10 –19 J
(b) If N is the number of photons emitted by the source per second,
the power P transmitted in the beam equals N times the energy
per photon E, so that P = N E. Then
N =
P 2.0 × 10 − 3 W
=
E 3.98 × 10 − 19 J
= 5.0 ×10 15 photons per second.
Example 11.2 The work function of caesium is 2.14 eV. Find (a) the
threshold frequency for caesium, and (b) the wavelength of the incident
light if the photocurrent is brought to zero by a stopping potential of
0.60 V.
Solution
(a) For the cut-off or threshold frequency, the energy h ν 0 of the incident
radiation must be equal to work function φ 0 , so that
ν 0 = φ 0 =
396
h
=
2.14 eV
6.63 × 10 − 34 J s
2.14 × 1.6 × 10 − 19 J
= 5.16 × 10 14 Hz
6.63 × 10 − 34 J s
Thus, for frequencies less than this threshold frequency, no
photoelectrons are ejected.
(b) Photocurrent reduces to zero, when maximum kinetic energy of
the emitted photoelectrons equals the potential energy e V 0 by the
retarding potential V 0 . Einstein’s Photoelectric equation isDual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
eV 0 = h ν – φ 0 =
hc
λ
or, λ = hc/(eV 0 + φ 0 )
– φ 0
(6.63 × 10 − 34 J s) × (3 × 10 8 m/s)
(0.60 eV + 2.14 eV)
= 19.89 × 10 − 26 J m
(2.74 eV)
λ =
19.89 × 10 − 26 J m
= 454 nm
2.74 × 1.6 × 10 − 19 J
=
Example 11.3 The wavelength of light in the visible region is about
390 nm for violet colour, about 550 nm (average wavelength) for yellow-
green colour and about 760 nm for red colour.
(a) What are the energies of photons in (eV) at the (i) violet end, (ii)
average wavelength, yellow-green colour, and (iii) red end of the
visible spectrum? (Take h = 6.63×10 –34 J s and 1 eV = 1.6×10 –19 J.)
(b) From which of the photosensitive materials with work functions
listed in Table 11.1 and using the results of (i), (ii) and (iii) of (a),
can you build a photoelectric device that operates with visible
light?
Solution
(a) Energy of the incident photon, E = hν = hc/ λ
E = (6.63×10 –34 J s) (3×10 8 m/s)/ λ
=
1.989 × 10 –25 J m
λ
(i) For violet light, λ 1 = 390 nm (lower wavelength end)
1.989 × 10 –25 J m
Incident photon energy, E 1 =
390×10 –9 m
= 5.10 × 10 –19 J
5.10 × 10 –19 J
=
1.6×10 –19 J/eV
= 3.19 eV
(ii) For yellow-green light, λ 2 = 550 nm (average wavelength)
1.989 × 10 –25 J m
Incident photon energy, E 2 =
550×10 –9 m
= 3.62×10 –19 J = 2.26 eV
(iii) For red light, λ 3 = 760 nm (higher wavelength end)
1.989 × 10 –25 J m
Incident photon energy, E 3 =
760×10 –9 m
= 2.62×10 –19 J = 1.64 eV
(b) For a photoelectric device to operate, we require incident light energy
E to be equal to or greater than the work function φ 0 of the material.
Thus, the photoelectric device will operate with violet light (with
E = 3.19 eV) photosensitive material Na (with φ 0 = 2.75 eV), K (with
φ 0 = 2.30 eV) and Cs (with φ 0 = 2.14 eV). It will also operate with
yellow-green light (with E = 2.26 eV) for Cs (with φ 0 = 2.14 eV) only.
However, it will not operate with red light (with E = 1.64 eV) for any
of these photosensitive materials.
397Physics
11.8 W AVE N ATURE
OF
M ATTER
The dual (wave-particle) nature of light (electromagnetic radiation, in
general) comes out clearly from what we have learnt in this and the
preceding chapters. The wave nature of light shows up in the phenomena
of interference, diffraction and polarisation. On the other hand, in
photoelectric effect and Compton effect which involve energy and
momentum transfer, radiation behaves as if it is made up of a bunch of
particles – the photons. Whether a particle or wave description is best
suited for understanding an experiment depends on the nature of the
experiment. For example, in the familiar phenomenon of seeing an object
by our eye, both descriptions are important. The gathering and focussing
mechanism of light by the eye-lens is well described in the wave picture.
But its absorption by the rods and cones (of the retina) requires the photon
picture of light.
A natural question arises: If radiation has a dual (wave-particle) nature,
might not the particles of nature (the electrons, protons, etc.) also exhibit
wave-like character? In 1924, the French physicist Louis Victor de Broglie
(pronounced as de Broy) (1892-1987) put forward the bold hypothesis
that moving particles of matter should display wave-like properties under
suitable conditions. He reasoned that nature was symmetrical and that
the two basic physical entities – matter and energy, must have symmetrical
character. If radiation shows dual aspects, so should matter. De Broglie
proposed that the wave length λ associated with a particle of momentum
p is given as
λ =
h
h
=
p
mv
(11.5)
where m is the mass of the particle and v its speed. Equation (11.5) is
known as the de Broglie relation and the wavelength λ of the matter
wave is called de Broglie wavelength. The dual aspect of matter is evident
in the de Broglie relation. On the left hand side of Eq. (11.5), λ is the
attribute of a wave while on the right hand side the momentum p is a
typical attribute of a particle. Planck’s constant h relates the two
attributes.
Equation (11.5) for a material particle is basically a hypothesis whose
validity can be tested only by experiment. However, it is interesting to see
that it is satisfied also by a photon. For a photon, as we have seen,
p = h ν /c
(11.6)
Therefore,
398
h c
= = λ
(11.7)
p ν
That is, the de Broglie wavelength of a photon given by Eq. (11.5) equals
the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation of which the photon is a
quantum of energy and momentum.
Clearly, from Eq. (11.5 ), λ is smaller for a heavier particle ( large m ) or
more energetic particle (large v). For example, the de Broglie wavelength
of a ball of mass 0.12 kg moving with a speed of 20 m s –1 is easily
calculated:Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
P HOTOCELL
A photocell is a technological application of the photoelectric effect. It is a device whose
electrical properties are affected by light. It is also sometimes called an electric eye. A photocell
consists of a semi-cylindrical photo-sensitive metal plate C (emitter) and a wire loop A
(collector) supported in an evacuated glass or quartz bulb. It is connected to the external
circuit having a high-tension battery B and microammeter (μA) as shown in the Figure.
Sometimes, instead of the plate C, a thin layer of photosensitive material is pasted on the
inside of the bulb. A part of the bulb is left clean for the light to enter it.
When light of suitable wavelength falls on the
emitter C, photoelectrons are emitted. These
photoelectrons are drawn to the collector A.
Photocurrent of the order of a few microampere
can be normally obtained from a photo cell.
A photocell converts a change in intensity of
illumination into a change in photocurrent. This
current can be used to operate control systems
and in light measuring devices. A photocell of lead
sulphide sensitive to infrared radiation is used
in electronic ignition circuits.
In scientific work, photo cells are used
whenever it is necessary to measure the intensity
of light. Light meters in photographic cameras
make use of photo cells to measure the intensity
of incident light. The photocells, inserted in the
door light electric circuit, are used as automatic
door opener. A person approaching a doorway
may interrupt a light beam which is incident on
a photocell. The abrupt change in photocurrent
A photo cell
may be used to start a motor which opens the
door or rings an alarm. They are used in the
control of a counting device which records every interruption of the light beam caused by a
person or object passing across the beam. So photocells help count the persons entering an
auditorium, provided they enter the hall one by one. They are used for detection of traffic
law defaulters: an alarm may be sounded whenever a beam of (invisible) radiation is
intercepted.
In burglar alarm, (invisible) ultraviolet light is continuously made to fall on a photocell
installed at the doorway. A person entering the door interrupts the beam falling on the
photocell. The abrupt change in photocurrent is used to start an electric bell ringing. In fire
alarm, a number of photocells are installed at suitable places in a building. In the event of
breaking out of fire, light radiations fall upon the photocell. This completes the electric
circuit through an electric bell or a siren which starts operating as a warning signal.
Photocells are used in the reproduction of sound in motion pictures and in the television
camera for scanning and telecasting scenes. They are used in industries for detecting minor
flaws or holes in metal sheets.
p = m v = 0.12 kg × 20 m s –1 = 2.40 kg m s –1
λ =
6.63 × 10 − 34 J s
h
=
= 2.76 × 10 –34 m
2.40 kg m s − 1
p
399Physics
400
This wavelength is so small that it is beyond any
measurement. This is the reason why macroscopic objects
in our daily life do not show wave-like properties. On the
other hand, in the sub-atomic domain, the wave character
of particles is significant and measurable.
Consider an electron (mass m, charge e) accelerated
from rest through a potential V. The kinetic energy K
of the electron equals the work done (eV ) on it by the
electric field:
K = e V
(11.8)
Now, K =
Louis Victor de Broglie
(1892 – 1987) French
physicist who put forth
revolutionary idea of wave
nature of matter. This idea
was developed by Erwin
Schródinger into a full-
fledged theory of quantum
mechanics
commonly
known as wave mechanics.
In 1929, he was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physics for his
discovery of the wave nature
of electrons.
p =
1
p 2
m v 2 =
, so that
2
2 m
2 m K =
2 m eV
(11.9)
The de Broglie wavelength λ of the electron is then
λ =
h
h
h
=
=
p
2 mK
2 m eV
(11.10)
Substituting the numerical values of h, m, e,
we get
1.227
nm
(11.11)
V
where V is the magnitude of accelerating potential in
volts. For a 120 V accelerating potential, Eq. (11.11) gives
λ = 0.112 nm. This wavelength is of the same order as
the spacing between the atomic planes in crystals. This
suggests that matter waves associated with an electron could be verified
by crystal diffraction experiments analogous to X-ray diffraction. We
describe the experimental verification of the de Broglie hypothesis in the
next section. In 1929, de Broglie was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics
for his discovery of the wave nature of electrons.
The matter–wave picture elegantly incorporated the Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle. According to the principle, it is not possible to
measure both the position and momentum of an electron (or any other
particle) at the same time exactly. There is always some uncertainty (∆ x )
in the specification of position and some uncertainty (∆p ) in the
specification of momentum. The product of ∆x and ∆p is of the order of ħ *
(with ħ = h/2π), i.e.,
∆x ∆p ≈ ħ
(11.12)
Equation (11.12) allows the possibility that ∆x is zero; but then ∆p
must be infinite in order that the product is non-zero. Similarly, if ∆p is
zero, ∆x must be infinite. Ordinarily, both ∆x and ∆p are non-zero such
that their product is of the order of ħ.
Now, if an electron has a definite momentum p, (i.e.∆p = 0), by the de
Broglie relation, it has a definite wavelength λ . A wave of definite (single)
λ =
* A more rigorous treatment gives ∆x ∆p ≥ ħ/2.Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
wavelength extends all over space. By Born’s
probability interpretation this means that the
electron is not localised in any finite region of
space. That is, its position uncertainty is infinite
(∆x → ∞), which is consistent with the
uncertainty principle.
In general, the matter wave associated with
the electron is not extended all over space. It is
a wave packet extending over some finite region
of space. In that case ∆x is not infinite but has
some finite value depending on the extension
of the wave packet. Also, you must appreciate
that a wave packet of finite extension does not
have a single wavelength. It is built up of
wavelengths spread around some central
wavelength.
By de Broglie’s relation, then, the
momentum of the electron will also have a
spread – an uncertainty ∆p. This is as expected
from the uncertainty principle. It can be shown
that the wave packet description together with
de Broglie relation and Born’s probability
interpretation reproduce the Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle exactly.
In Chapter 12, the de Broglie relation will
be seen to justify Bohr’s postulate on
quantisation of angular momentum of electron
in an atom.
Figure 11.6 shows a schematic diagram of
(a) a localised wave packet, and (b) an extended
wave with fixed wavelength.
FIGURE 11.6 (a) The wave packet description of
an electron. The wave packet corresponds to a
spread of wavelength around some central
wavelength (and hence by de Broglie relation,
a spread in momentum). Consequently, it is
associated with an uncertainty in position
(∆x) and an uncertainty in momentum (∆p).
(b) The matter wave corresponding to a
definite momentum of an electron
extends all over space. In this case,
∆p = 0 and ∆ x → ∞.
Example 11.4 What is the de Broglie wavelength associated with (a) an
electron moving with a speed of 5.4×10 6 m/s, and (b) a ball of mass 150 g
travelling at 30.0 m/s?
Solution
(a) For the electron:
Mass m = 9.11×10 –31 kg, speed v = 5.4×10 6 m/s. Then, momentum
p = m v = 9.11×10 –31 (kg) × 5.4 × 10 6 (m/s)
p = 4.92 × 10 –24 kg m/s
de Broglie wavelength, λ = h/p
=
6 . 63 × 10 –34 J s
4 . 92 × 10 –24 kg m/s
λ = 0.135 nm
(b) For the ball:
Mass m ’ = 0.150 kg, speed v ’ = 30.0 m/s.
Then momentum p ’ = m’ v ’ = 0.150 (kg) × 30.0 (m/s)
p ’= 4.50 kg m/s
de Broglie wavelength λ’ = h/p’.
40111.4
Physics
=
6 . 63 × 10 ± 34 J s
4 . 50 × kg m/s
λ ’ = 1.47 ×10 –34 m
The de Broglie wavelength of electron is comparable with X-ray
wavelengths. However, for the ball it is about 10 –19 times the size of
the proton, quite beyond experimental measurement.
Example 11.5 An electron, an α-particle, and a proton have the same
kinetic energy. Which of these particles has the shortest de Broglie
wavelength?
Solution
For a particle, de Broglie wavelength, λ = h/p
Kinetic energy, K = p 2 /2m
Then, λ = h / 2 mK
For the same kinetic energy K, the de Broglie wavelength associated
with the particle is inversely proportional to the square root of their
masses. A proton
(
4
2
)
( H )
1
1
is 1836 times massive than an electron and
an α-particle He four times that of a proton.
Hence, α – particle has the shortest de Broglie wavelength.
P ROBABILITY INTERPRETATION TO
MATTER WAVES
402
It is worth pausing here to reflect on just what a matter wave associated with a particle,
say, an electron, means. Actually, a truly satisfactory physical understanding of the
dual nature of matter and radiation has not emerged so far. The great founders of
quantum mechanics (Niels Bohr, Albert Einstein, and many others) struggled with this
and related concepts for long. Still the deep physical interpretation of quantum
mechanics continues to be an area of active research. Despite this, the concept of
matter wave has been mathematically introduced in modern quantum mechanics with
great success. An important milestone in this connection was when Max Born (1882-
1970) suggested a probability interpretation to the matter wave amplitude. According
to this, the intensity (square of the amplitude) of the matter wave at a point determines
the probability density of the particle at that point. Probability density means probability
per unit volume. Thus, if A is the amplitude of the wave at a point, |A| 2 ∆V is the
probability of the particle being found in a small volume ∆V around that point. Thus,
if the intensity of matter wave is large in a certain region, there is a greater probability
of the particle being found there than where the intensity is small.
Example 11.6 A particle is moving three times as fast as an electron.
The ratio of the de Broglie wavelength of the particle to that of the
electron is 1.813 × 10 –4 . Calculate the particle’s mass and identify the
particle.
Solution
de Broglie wavelength of a moving particle, having mass m and
velocity v:Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
λ =
h h
=
p mv
Mass, m = h/ λ v
For an electron, mass m e = h/ λ e v e
Now, we have v/v e = 3 and
λ / λ e = 1.813 × 10 – 4
m = (9.11×10 –31 kg) × (1/3) × (1/1.813 × 10 –4 )
m = 1.675 × 10 –27 kg.
Thus, the particle, with this mass could be a proton or a neutron.
 λ e   v e 
Then, mass of the particle, m = m e        
λ
v
Example 11.7 What is the de Broglie wavelength associated with an
electron, accelerated through a potential differnece of 100 volts?
Solution Accelerating potential V = 100 V. The de Broglie wavelength
λ is
1 . 227
nm
V
1 . 227
nm = 0.123 nm
100
The de Broglie wavelength associated with an electron in this case is of
the order of X-ray wavelengths.
λ =
11.9 D AVISSON
AND
λ = h /p =
G ERMER E XPERIMENT
The wave nature of electrons was first experimentally verified by C.J.
Davisson and L.H. Germer in 1927 and independently by G.P. Thomson,
in 1928, who observed
diffraction effects with beams of
electrons scattered by crystals.
Davisson and Thomson shared
the Nobel Prize in 1937 for their
experimental discovery of
diffraction of electrons by
crystals.
The experimental arrange-
ment used by Davisson and
Germer is schematically shown
in Fig. 11.7. It consists of an
electron gun which comprises of
a tungsten filament F, coated
with barium oxide and heated
by a low voltage power supply
(L.T. or battery). Electrons
FIGURE 11.7 Davisson-Germer electron
emitted by the filament are
diffraction arrangement.
accelerated to a desired velocity
403404
Physics
by applying suitable potential/voltage from a high voltage power supply
(H.T. or battery). They are made to pass through a cylinder with fine
holes along its axis, producing a fine collimated beam. The beam is made
to fall on the surface of a nickel crystal. The electrons are scattered in all
directions by the atoms of the crystal. The intensity of the electron beam,
scattered in a given direction, is measured by the electron detector
(collector). The detector can be moved on a circular scale and is connected
to a sensitive galvanometer, which records the current. The deflection of
the galvanometer is proportional to the intensity of the electron beam
entering the collector. The apparatus is enclosed in an evacuated chamber.
By moving the detector on the circular scale at different positions, the
intensity of the scattered electron beam is measured for different values
of angle of scattering θ which is the angle between the incident and the
scattered electron beams. The variation of the intensity (I ) of the scattered
electrons with the angle of scattering θ is obtained for different accelerating
voltages.
The experiment was performed by varying the accelarating voltage
from 44 V to 68 V. It was noticed that a strong peak appeared in the
intensity (I ) of the scattered electron for an accelarating voltage of 54V at
a scattering angle θ = 50o
The appearance of the peak in a particular direction is due to the
constructive interference of electrons scattered from different layers of the
regularly spaced atoms of the crystals. From the electron diffraction
measurements, the wavelength of matter waves was found to be
0.165 nm.
The de Broglie wavelength λ associated with electrons, using
Eq. (11.11), for V = 54 V is given by
λ = h /p =
λ =
1 . 227
nm
V
1 . 227
nm = 0.167 nm
54
Thus, there is an excellent agreement between the theoretical value
and the experimentally obtained value of de Broglie wavelength. Davisson-
Germer experiment thus strikingly confirms the wave nature of electrons
and the de Broglie relation. More recently, in 1989, the wave nature of a
beam of electrons was experimentally demonstrated in a double-slit
experiment, similar to that used for the wave nature of light. Also, in an
experiment in 1994, interference fringes were obtained with the beams of
iodine molecules, which are about a million times more massive than
electrons.
The de Broglie hypothesis has been basic to the development of modern
quantum mechanics. It has also led to the field of electron optics. The
wave properties of electrons have been utilised in the design of electron
microscope which is a great improvement, with higher resolution, over
the optical microscope.Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
SUMMARY
1. The minimum energy needed by an electron to come out from a metal
surface is called the work function of the metal. Energy (greater than
the work function (φ ο ) required for electron emission from the metal
surface can be supplied by suitably heating or applying strong electric
field or irradiating it by light of suitable frequency.
2. Photoelectric effect is the phenomenon of emission of electrons by metals
when illuminated by light of suitable frequency. Certain metals respond
to ultraviolet light while others are sensitive even to the visible light.
Photoelectric effect involves conversion of light energy into electrical
energy. It follows the law of conservation of energy. The photoelectric
emission is an instantaneous process and possesses certain special
features.
3. Photoelectric current depends on (i) the intensity of incident light, (ii)
the potential difference applied between the two electrodes, and (iii)
the nature of the emitter material.
4. The stopping potential (V o ) depends on (i) the frequency of incident
light, and (ii) the nature of the emitter material. For a given frequency
of incident light, it is independent of its intensity. The stopping potential
is directly related to the maximum kinetic energy of electrons emitted:
e V 0 = (1/2) m v 2 max = K max .
5. Below a certain frequency (threshold frequency) ν 0 , characteristic of
the metal, no photoelectric emission takes place, no matter how large
the intensity may be.
6. The classical wave theory could not explain the main features of
photoelectric effect. Its picture of continuous absorption of energy from
radiation could not explain the independence of K max on intensity, the
existence of ν o and the instantaneous nature of the process. Einstein
explained these features on the basis of photon picture of light.
According to this, light is composed of discrete packets of energy called
quanta or photons. Each photon carries an energy E (= h ν ) and
momentum p (= h/λ), which depend on the frequency ( ν ) of incident
light and not on its intensity. Photoelectric emission from the metal
surface occurs due to absorption of a photon by an electron.
7. Einstein’s photoelectric equation is in accordance with the energy
conservation law as applied to the photon absorption by an electron in
the metal. The maximum kinetic energy (1/2)m v 2 max is equal to
the photon energy (h ν ) minus the work function φ 0 (= h ν 0 ) of the
target metal:
1
m v 2 max = V 0 e = h ν – φ 0 = h ( ν – ν 0 )
2
This photoelectric equation explains all the features of the photoelectric
effect. Millikan’s first precise measurements confirmed the Einstein’s
photoelectric equation and obtained an accurate value of Planck’s
constant h . This led to the acceptance of particle or photon description
(nature) of electromagnetic radiation, introduced by Einstein.
8.
Radiation has dual nature: wave and particle. The nature of experiment
determines whether a wave or particle description is best suited for
understanding the experimental result. Reasoning that radiation and
matter should be symmetrical in nature, Louis Victor de Broglie
405Physics
attributed a wave-like character to matter (material particles). The waves
associated with the moving material particles are called matter waves
or de Broglie waves.
9. The de Broglie wavelength ( λ ) associated with a moving particle is related
to its momentum p as: λ = h/p. The dualism of matter is inherent in the
de Broglie relation which contains a wave concept ( λ ) and a particle concept
(p). The de Broglie wavelength is independent of the charge and nature of
the material particle. It is significantly measurable (of the order of the
atomic-planes spacing in crystals) only in case of sub-atomic particles
like electrons, protons, etc. (due to smallness of their masses and hence,
momenta). However, it is indeed very small, quite beyond measurement,
in case of macroscopic objects, commonly encountered in everyday life.
10. Electron diffraction experiments by Davisson and Germer, and by G. P.
Thomson, as well as many later experiments, have verified and confirmed
the wave-nature of electrons. The de Broglie hypothesis of matter waves
supports the Bohr ’s concept of stationary orbits.
Physical
Quantity Symbol Dimensions Unit
Remarks
Planck’s h [ML 2 T –1 ] J s E = h ν
Stopping
potential V 0 [ML 2 T –3 A –1 ] V e V 0 = K max
Work
function φ 0 [ML 2 T –2 ] J; eV K max = E – φ 0
Threshold
frequency ν 0 [T –1 ] Hz ν 0 = φ 0 /h
de Broglie
wavelength λ [L] m λ = h/p
constant
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
2.
3.
406
Free electrons in a metal are free in the sense that they move inside the
metal in a constant potential (This is only an approximation). They are
not free to move out of the metal. They need additional energy to get
out of the metal.
Free electrons in a metal do not all have the same energy. Like molecules
in a gas jar, the electrons have a certain energy distribution at a given
temperature. This distribution is different from the usual Maxwell’s
distribution that you have learnt in the study of kinetic theory of gases.
You will learn about it in later courses, but the difference has to do
with the fact that electrons obey Pauli’s exclusion principle.
Because of the energy distribution of free electrons in a metal, the
energy required by an electron to come out of the metal is different for
different electrons. Electrons with higher energy require less additional
energy to come out of the metal than those with lower energies. Work
function is the least energy required by an electron to come out of the
metal.Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
4.
5.
6.
Observations on photoelectric effect imply that in the event of matter-
light interaction, absorption of energy takes place in discrete units of h ν .
This is not quite the same as saying that light consists of particles,
each of energy h ν .
Observations on the stopping potential (its independence of intensity
and dependence on frequency) are the crucial discriminator between
the wave-picture and photon-picture of photoelectric effect.
The wavelength of a matter wave given by λ =
h
p
has physical
significance; its phase velocity v p has no physical significance. However,
the group velocity of the matter wave is physically meaningful and
equals the velocity of the particle.
EXERCISES
11.2 Find the
(a) maximum frequency, and
(b) minimum wavelength of X-rays produced by 30 kV electrons.
The work function of caesium metal is 2.14 eV. When light of
frequency 6 ×10 14 Hz is incident on the metal surface, photoemission
of electrons occurs. What is the
(a) maximum kinetic energy of the emitted electrons,
11.3 (b) Stopping potential, and
(c) maximum speed of the emitted photoelectrons?
The photoelectric cut-off voltage in a certain experiment is 1.5 V.
What is the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons emitted?
Monochromatic light of wavelength 632.8 nm is produced by a
helium-neon laser. The power emitted is 9.42 mW.
11.1
11.4
(a) Find the energy and momentum of each photon in the light beam,
(b) How many photons per second, on the average, arrive at a target
irradiated by this beam? (Assume the beam to have uniform
cross-section which is less than the target area ), and
(c) How fast does a hydrogen atom have to travel in order to have
the same momentum as that of the photon?
11.5
11.6
11.7
The energy flux of sunlight reaching the surface of the earth is
1.388 × 10 3 W/m 2 . How many photons (nearly) per square metre are
incident on the Earth per second ? Assume that the photons in the
sunlight have an average wavelength of 550 nm.
In an experiment on photoelectric effect, the slope of the cut-off
voltage versus frequency of incident light is found to be 4.12 × 10 –15 V s.
Calculate the value of Planck’s constant.
A 100W sodium lamp radiates energy uniformly in all directions.
The lamp is located at the centre of a large sphere that absorbs all
the sodium light which is incident on it. The wavelength of the
sodium light is 589 nm. (a) What is the energy per photon associated
407Physics
with the sodium light? (b) At what rate are the photons delivered to
the sphere?
11.8 The threshold frequency for a certain metal is 3.3 × 10 14 Hz. If light
of frequency 8.2 × 10 14 Hz is incident on the metal, predict the cut-
off voltage for the photoelectric emission.
11.9 The work function for a certain metal is 4.2 eV. Will this metal give
photoelectric emission for incident radiation of wavelength 330 nm?
11.10 Light of frequency 7.21 × 10 14 Hz is incident on a metal surface.
Electrons with a maximum speed of 6.0 × 10 5 m/s are ejected from
the surface. What is the threshold frequency for photoemission of
electrons?
11.11 Light of wavelength 488 nm is produced by an argon laser which is
used in the photoelectric effect. When light from this spectral line is
incident on the emitter, the stopping (cut-of f) potential of
photoelectrons is 0.38 V. Find the work function of the material
from which the emitter is made.
11.12 Calculate the
(a) momentum, and
(b) de Broglie wavelength of the electrons accelerated through a
potential difference of 56 V.
11.13 What is the
(a) momentum,
(b) speed, and
(c) de Broglie wavelength of an electron with kinetic energy of
120 eV.
11.14 The wavelength of light from the spectral emission line of sodium is
589 nm. Find the kinetic energy at which
(a) an electron, and
(b) a neutron, would have the same de Broglie wavelength.
11.15 What is the de Broglie wavelength of
(a) a bullet of mass 0.040 kg travelling at the speed of 1.0 km/s,
(b) a ball of mass 0.060 kg moving at a speed of 1.0 m/s, and
(c) a dust particle of mass 1.0 × 10 –9 kg drifting with a speed of
2.2 m/s ?
11.16 An
(a)
(b)
(c)
electron and a photon each have a wavelength of 1.00 nm. Find
their momenta,
the energy of the photon, and
the kinetic energy of electron.
11.17 (a) For what kinetic energy of a neutron will the associated de Broglie
wavelength be 1.40 × 10 –10 m?
(b) Also find the de Broglie wavelength of a neutron, in thermal
equilibrium with matter, having an average kinetic energy of
(3/2) k T at 300 K.
11.18 Show that the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation is equal to
the de Broglie wavelength of its quantum (photon).
408
11.19 What is the de Broglie wavelength of a nitrogen molecule in air at
300 K ? Assume that the molecule is moving with the root-mean-
square speed of molecules at this temperature. (Atomic mass of
nitrogen = 14.0076 u)Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
11.20 (a) Estimate the speed with which electrons emitted from a heated
emitter of an evacuated tube impinge on the collector maintained
at a potential difference of 500 V with respect to the emitter.
Ignore the small initial speeds of the electrons. The
specific charge of the electron, i.e., its e/m is given to be
1.76 × 10 11 C kg –1 .
(b) Use the same formula you employ in (a) to obtain electron speed
for an collector potential of 10 MV. Do you see what is wrong ? In
what way is the formula to be modified?
11.21 (a) A monoenergetic electron beam with electron speed of
5.20 × 10 6 m s –1 is subject to a magnetic field of 1.30 × 10 –4 T
normal to the beam velocity. What is the radius of the circle traced
by the beam, given e/m for electron equals 1.76 × 10 11 C kg –1 .
(b) Is the formula you employ in (a) valid for calculating radius of
the path of a 20 MeV electron beam? If not, in what way is it
modified ?
[Note: Exercises 11.20(b) and 11.21(b) take you to relativistic
mechanics which is beyond the scope of this book. They have been
inserted here simply to emphasise the point that the formulas you
use in part (a) of the exercises are not valid at very high speeds or
energies. See answers at the end to know what ‘very high speed or
energy’ means.]
11.22 An electron gun with its collector at a potential of 100 V fires out
electrons in a spherical bulb containing hydrogen gas at low
pressure (∼10 –2 mm of Hg). A magnetic field of 2.83 × 10 –4 T curves
the path of the electrons in a circular orbit of radius 12.0 cm. (The
path can be viewed because the gas ions in the path focus the beam
by attracting electrons, and emitting light by electron capture; this
method is known as the ‘fine beam tube’ method.) Determine
e/m from the data.
11.23 (a) An X-ray tube produces a continuous spectrum of radiation with
its short wavelength end at 0.45 Å. What is the maximum energy
of a photon in the radiation ?
(b) From your answer to (a), guess what order of accelerating voltage
(for electrons) is required in such a tube ?
11.24 In an accelerator experiment on high-energy collisions of electrons
with positrons, a certain event is interpreted as annihilation of an
electron-positron pair of total energy 10.2 BeV into two γ-rays of
equal energy. What is the wavelength associated with each γ-ray?
(1BeV = 10 9 eV)
11.25 Estimating the following two numbers should be interesting. The
first number will tell you why radio engineers do not need to worry
much about photons! The second number tells you why our eye can
never ‘count photons’, even in barely detectable light.
(a) The number of photons emitted per second by a Medium wave
transmitter of 10 kW power, emitting radiowaves of wavelength
500 m.
(b) The number of photons entering the pupil of our eye per second
corresponding to the minimum intensity of white light that we
409Physics
humans can perceive (∼10 –10 W m –2 ). Take the area of the pupil
to be about 0.4 cm 2 , and the average frequency of white light to
be about 6 × 10 14 Hz.
11.26 Ultraviolet light of wavelength 2271 Å from a 100 W mercury source
irradiates a photo-cell made of molybdenum metal. If the stopping
potential is –1.3 V, estimate the work function of the metal. How
would the photo-cell respond to a high intensity (∼10 5 W m –2 ) red
light of wavelength 6328 Å produced by a He-Ne laser ?
11.27 Monochromatic radiation of wavelength 640.2 nm (1nm = 10 –9 m)
from a neon lamp irradiates photosensitive material made of caesium
on tungsten. The stopping voltage is measured to be 0.54 V. The
source is replaced by an iron source and its 427.2 nm line irradiates
the same photo-cell. Predict the new stopping voltage.
11.28 A mercury lamp is a convenient source for studying frequency
dependence of photoelectric emission, since it gives a number of
spectral lines ranging from the UV to the red end of the visible
spectrum. In our experiment with rubidium photo-cell, the following
lines from a mercury source were used:
λ 1 = 3650 Å, λ 2 = 4047 Å, λ 3 = 4358 Å, λ 4 = 5461 Å, λ 5 = 6907 Å,
The stopping voltages, respectively, were measured to be:
V 01 = 1.28 V, V 02 = 0.95 V, V 03 = 0.74 V, V 04 = 0.16 V, V 05 = 0 V
Determine the value of Planck’s constant h, the threshold frequency
and work function for the material.
[Note: You will notice that to get h from the data, you will need to
know e (which you can take to be 1.6 × 10 –19 C). Experiments of this
kind on Na, Li, K, etc. were performed by Millikan, who, using his
own value of e (from the oil-drop experiment) confirmed Einstein’s
photoelectric equation and at the same time gave an independent
estimate of the value of h.]
11.29 The work function for the following metals is given:
Na: 2.75 eV; K: 2.30 eV; Mo: 4.17 eV; Ni: 5.15 eV. Which of these
metals will not give photoelectric emission for a radiation of
wavelength 3300 Å from a He-Cd laser placed 1 m away from the
photocell? What happens if the laser is brought nearer and placed
50 cm away ?
11.30 Light of intensity 10 –5 W m –2 falls on a sodium photo-cell of surface
area 2 cm 2 . Assuming that the top 5 layers of sodium absorb the
incident energy, estimate time required for photoelectric emission
in the wave-picture of radiation. The work function for the metal is
given to be about 2 eV. What is the implication of your answer ?
11.31 Crystal diffraction experiments can be performed using X-rays, or
electrons accelerated through appropriate voltage. Which probe has
greater energy? (For quantitative comparison, take the wavelength
of the probe equal to 1 Å, which is of the order of inter-atomic spacing
in the lattice) (m e =9.11 × 10 –31 kg).
410
11.32 (a) Obtain the de Broglie wavelength of a neutron of kinetic energy
150 eV. As you have seen in Exercise 11.31, an electron beam of
this energy is suitable for crystal diffraction experiments. Would
a neutron beam of the same energy be equally suitable ? Explain.
(m n = 1.675 × 10 –27 kg)Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
11.33
11.34
11.35
11.36
11.37
(b) Obtain the de Broglie wavelength associated with thermal
neutrons at room temperature (27 oC). Hence explain why a fast
neutron beam needs to be thermalised with the environment
before it can be used for neutron diffraction experiments.
An electron microscope uses electrons accelerated by a voltage of
50 kV. Determine the de Broglie wavelength associated with the
electrons. If other factors (such as numerical aperture, etc.) are
taken to be roughly the same, how does the resolving power of an
electron microscope compare with that of an optical microscope
which uses yellow light?
The wavelength of a probe is roughly a measure of the size of a
structure that it can probe in some detail. The quark structure
of protons and neutrons appears at the minute length-scale of
10 –15 m or less. This structure was first probed in early 1970’s using
high energy electron beams produced by a linear accelerator at
Stanford, USA. Guess what might have been the order of energy of
these electron beams. (Rest mass energy of electron = 0.511 MeV.)
Find the typical de Broglie wavelength associated with a He atom in
helium gas at room temperature (27 oC) and 1 atm pressure; and
compare it with the mean separation between two atoms under these
conditions.
Compute the typical de Broglie wavelength of an electron in a metal
at 27 oC and compare it with the mean separation between two
electrons in a metal which is given to be about 2 × 10 –10 m.
[Note: Exercises 11.35 and 11.36 reveal that while the wave-packets
associated with gaseous molecules under ordinary conditions are
non-overlapping, the electron wave-packets in a metal strongly
overlap with one another. This suggests that whereas molecules in
an ordinary gas can be distinguished apart, electrons in a metal
cannot be distintguished apart from one another. This
indistinguishibility has many fundamental implications which you
will explore in more advanced Physics courses.]
Answer the following questions:
(a) Quarks inside protons and neutrons are thought to carry
fractional charges [(+2/3)e ; (–1/3)e]. Why do they not show up
in Millikan’s oil-drop experiment?
(b) What is so special about the combination e/m? Why do we not
simply talk of e and m separately?
(c) Why should gases be insulators at ordinary pressures and start
conducting at very low pressures?
(d) Every metal has a definite work function. Why do all
photoelectrons not come out with the same energy if incident
radiation is monochromatic? Why is there an energy distribution
of photoelectrons?
(e) The energy and momentum of an electron are related to the
frequency and wavelength of the associated matter wave by the
relations:
E = h ν , p =
h
λ
But while the value of λ is physically significant, the value of ν
(and therefore, the value of the phase speed ν λ ) has no physical
significance. Why?
411Physics
A PPENDIX
11.1 The history of wave-particle flip-flop
What is light? This question has haunted mankind for a long time. But systematic experiments were done by
scientists since the dawn of the scientific and industrial era, about four centuries ago. Around the same time,
theoretical models about what light is made of were developed. While building a model in any branch of
science, it is essential to see that it is able to explain all the experimental observations existing at that time.
It is therefore appropriate to summarize some observations about light that were known in the seventeenth
century.
The properties of light known at that time included (a) rectilinear propagation of light, (b) reflection from
plane and curved surfaces, (c) refraction at the boundary of two media, (d) dispersion into various colours, (e)
high speed. Appropriate laws were formulated for the first four phenomena. For example, Snell formulated his
laws of refraction in 1621. Several scientists right from the days of Galileo had tried to measure the speed of
light. But they had not been able to do so. They had only concluded that it was higher than the limit of their
measurement.
Two models of light were also proposed in the seventeenth century. Descartes, in early decades of seventeenth
century, proposed that light consists of particles, while Huygens, around 1650-60, proposed that light consists
of waves. Descartes′ proposal was merely a philosophical model, devoid of any experiments or scientific
arguments. Newton soon after, around 1660-70, extended Descartes′ particle model, known as corpuscular
theory, built it up as a scientific theory, and explained various known properties with it. These models, light
as waves and as particles, in a sense, are quite opposite of each other. But both models could explain all the
known properties of light. There was nothing to choose between them.
The history of the development of these models over the next few centuries is interesting. Bartholinus, in
1669, discovered double refraction of light in some crystals, and Huygens, in 1678, was quick to explain it on
the basis of his wave theory of light. In spite of this, for over one hundred years, Newton’s particle model was
firmly believed and preferred over the wave model. This was partly because of its simplicity and partly because
of Newton’s influence on contemporary physics.
Then in 1801, Young performed his double-slit experiment and observed interference fringes. This
phenomenon could be explained only by wave theory. It was realized that diffraction was also another
phenomenon which could be explained only by wave theory. In fact, it was a natural consequence of Huygens
idea of secondary wavelets emanating from every point in the path of light. These experiments could not be
explained by assuming that light consists of particles. Another phenomenon of polarisation was discovered
around 1810, and this too could be naturally explained by the wave theory. Thus wave theory of Huygens
came to the forefront and Newton’s particle theory went into the background. This situation again continued
for almost a century.
Better experiments were performed in the nineteenth century to determine the speed of light. With more
accurate experiments, a value of 3×10 8 m/s for speed of light in vacuum was arrived at. Around 1860, Maxwell
proposed his equations of electromagnetism and it was realized that all electromagnetic phenomena known at
that time could be explained by Maxwell’s four equations. Soon Maxwell showed that electric and magnetic
fields could propagate through empty space (vacuum) in the form of electromagnetic waves. He calculated the
speed of these waves and arrived at a theoretical value of 2.998×10 8 m/s. The close agreement of this value
with the experimental value suggested that light consists of electromagnetic waves. In 1887 Hertz demonstrated
the generation and detection of such waves. This established the wave theory of light on a firm footing. We
might say that while eighteenth century belonged to the particle model, the nineteenth century belonged to
the wave model of light.
Vast amounts of experiments were done during the period 1850-1900 on heat and related phenomena, an
altogether different area of physics. Theories and models like kinetic theory and thermodynamics were developed
which quite successfully explained the various phenomena, except one.
412Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter
Every body at any temperature emits radiation of all wavelengths. It also absorbs radiation falling on it.
A body which absorbs all the radiation falling on it is called a black body. It is an ideal concept in physics, like
concepts of a point mass or uniform motion. A graph of the intensity of radiation emitted by a body versus
wavelength is called the black body spectrum. No theory in those days could explain the complete black body
spectrum!
In 1900, Planck hit upon a novel idea. If we assume, he said, that radiation is emitted in packets of energy
instead of continuously as in a wave, then we can explain the black body spectrum. Planck himself regarded
these quanta, or packets, as a property of emission and absorption, rather than that of light. He derived a
formula which agreed with the entire spectrum. This was a confusing mixture of wave and particle pictures –
radiation is emitted as a particle, it travels as a wave, and is again absorbed as a particle! Moreover, this put
physicists in a dilemma. Should we again accept the particle picture of light just to explain one phenomenon?
Then what happens to the phenomena of interference and diffraction which cannot be explained by the
particle model?
But soon in 1905, Einstein explained the photoelectric effect by assuming the particle picture of light.
In 1907, Debye explained the low temperature specific heats of solids by using the particle picture for lattice
vibrations in a crystalline solid. Both these phenomena belonging to widely diverse areas of physics could be
explained only by the particle model and not by the wave model. In 1923, Compton’s x-ray scattering experiments
from atoms also went in favour of the particle picture. This increased the dilemma further.
Thus by 1923, physicists faced with the following situation. (a) There were some phenomena like rectilinear
propagation, reflection, refraction, which could be explained by either particle model or by wave model. (b)
There were some phenomena such as diffraction and interference which could be explained only by the wave
model but not by the particle model. (c) There were some phenomena such as black body radiation, photoelectric
effect, and Compton scattering which could be explained only by the particle model but not by the wave model.
Somebody in those days aptly remarked that light behaves as a particle on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays,
and as a wave on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, and we don’t talk of light on Sundays!
In 1924, de Broglie proposed his theory of wave-particle duality in which he said that not only photons
of light but also ‘particles’ of matter such as electrons and atoms possess a dual character, sometimes
behaving like a particle and sometimes as a wave. He gave a formula connecting their mass, velocity, momentum
(particle characteristics), with their wavelength and frequency (wave characteristics)! In 1927 Thomson, and
Davisson and Germer, in separate experiments, showed that electrons did behave like waves with a wavelength
which agreed with that given by de Broglie’s formula. Their experiment was on diffraction of electrons through
crystalline solids, in which the regular arrangement of atoms acted like a grating. Very soon, diffraction
experiments with other ‘particles’ such as neutrons and protons were performed and these too confirmed with
de Broglie’s formula. This confirmed wave-particle duality as an established principle of physics. Here was a
principle, physicists thought, which explained all the phenomena mentioned above not only for light but also
for the so-called particles.
But there was no basic theoretical foundation for wave-particle duality. De Broglie’s proposal was
merely a qualitative argument based on symmetry of nature. Wave-particle duality was at best a principle, not
an outcome of a sound fundamental theory. It is true that all experiments whatever agreed with de Broglie
formula. But physics does not work that way. On the one hand, it needs experimental confirmation, while on
the other hand, it also needs sound theoretical basis for the models proposed. This was developed over the
next two decades. Dirac developed his theory of radiation in about 1928, and Heisenberg and Pauli gave it a
firm footing by 1930. Tomonaga, Schwinger, and Feynman, in late 1940s, produced further refinements and
cleared the theory of inconsistencies which were noticed. All these theories mainly put wave-particle duality
on a theoretical footing.
Although the story continues, it grows more and more complex and beyond the scope of this note. But
we have here the essential structure of what happened, and let us be satisfied with it at the moment. Now it
is regarded as a natural consequence of present theories of physics that electromagnetic radiation as well as
particles of matter exhibit both wave and particle properties in different experiments, and sometimes even in
the different parts of the same experiment.
413
Physics
Chapter Twelve
ATOMS
12.1 I NTRODUCTION
414
By the nineteenth century, enough evidence had accumulated in favour of
atomic hypothesis of matter. In 1897, the experiments on electric discharge
through gases carried out by the English physicist J. J. Thomson (1856 –
1940) revealed that atoms of different elements contain negatively charged
constituents (electrons) that are identical for all atoms. However, atoms on a
whole are electrically neutral. Therefore, an atom must also contain some
positive charge to neutralise the negative charge of the electrons. But what
is the arrangement of the positive charge and the electrons inside the atom?
In other words, what is the structure of an atom?
The first model of atom was proposed by J. J. Thomson in 1898.
According to this model, the positive charge of the atom is uniformly
distributed throughout the volume of the atom and the negatively charged
electrons are embedded in it like seeds in a watermelon. This model was
picturesquely called plum pudding model of the atom. However
subsequent studies on atoms, as described in this chapter, showed that
the distribution of the electrons and positive charges are very different
from that proposed in this model.
We know that condensed matter (solids and liquids) and dense gases at
all temperatures emit electromagnetic radiation in which a continuous
distribution of several wavelengths is present, though with different
intensities. This radiation is considered to be due to oscillations of atomsAtoms
and molecules, governed by the interaction of each atom or
molecule with its neighbours. In contrast, light emitted from
rarefied gases heated in a flame, or excited electrically in a
glow tube such as the familiar neon sign or mercury vapour
light has only certain discrete wavelengths. The spectrum
appears as a series of bright lines. In such gases, the
average spacing between atoms is large. Hence, the
radiation emitted can be considered due to individual atoms
rather than because of interactions between atoms or
molecules.
In the early nineteenth century it was also established
that each element is associated with a characteristic
spectrum of radiation, for example, hydrogen always gives
a set of lines with fixed relative position between the lines.
Ernst Rutherford (1871 –
1937) British physicist
This fact suggested an intimate relationship between the
who did pioneering work on
internal structure of an atom and the spectrum of
radioactive radiation. He
radiation emitted by it. In 1885, Johann Jakob Balmer
discovered alpha-rays and
(1825 – 1898) obtained a simple empirical formula which
beta-rays. Along with
gave the wavelengths of a group of lines emitted by atomic
Federick Soddy, he created
hydrogen. Since hydrogen is simplest of the elements
the modern theory of
known, we shall consider its spectrum in detail in this
radioactivity. He studied
chapter.
the ‘emanation’ of thorium
Ernst Rutherford (1871–1937), a former research
and discovered a new noble
student of J. J. Thomson, was engaged in experiments on
gas, an isotope of radon,
α-particles emitted by some radioactive elements. In 1906,
now known as thoron. By
he proposed a classic experiment of scattering of these
scattering alpha-rays from
α-particles by atoms to investigate the atomic structure.
the
metal
foils,
he
This experiment was later performed around 1911 by Hans
discovered the atomic
Geiger (1882–1945) and Ernst Marsden (1889–1970, who
nucleus and proposed the
was 20 year-old student and had not yet earned his
plenatery model of the
bachelor’s degree). The details are discussed in Section
atom. He also estimated the
12.2. The explanation of the results led to the birth of
approximate size of the
Rutherford’s planetary model of atom (also called the
nucleus.
nuclear model of the atom). According to this the entire
positive charge and most of the mass of the atom is concentrated in a small
volume called the nucleus with electrons revolving around the nucleus just
as planets revolve around the sun.
Rutherford’s nuclear model was a major step towards how we see
the atom today. However, it could not explain why atoms emit light of
only discrete wavelengths. How could an atom as simple as hydrogen,
consisting of a single electron and a single proton, emit a complex
spectrum of specific wavelengths? In the classical picture of an atom, the
electron revolves round the nucleus much like the way a planet revolves
round the sun. However, we shall see that there are some serious
difficulties in accepting such a model.
12.2 A LPHA - PARTICLE S CATTERING AND
R UTHERFORD ’ S N UCLEAR M ODEL OF A TOM
At the suggestion of Ernst Rutherford, in 1911, H. Geiger and E. Marsden
performed some experiments. In one of their experiments, as shown in
415Physics
FIGURE 12.1 Geiger -Marsden scattering experiment.
The entire apparatus is placed in a vacuum chamber
(not shown in this figure).
Fig. 12.1, they directed a beam of
5.5 MeV α-particles emitted from a
214
radioactive source at a thin metal
83 Bi
foil made of gold. Figure 12.2 shows a
schematic diagram of this experiment.
Alpha-particles emitted by a 214
83 Bi
radioactive source were collimated into
a narrow beam by their passage
through lead bricks. The beam was
allowed to fall on a thin foil of gold of
thickness 2.1 × 10 –7 m. The scattered
alpha-particles were observed through
a rotatable detector consisting of zinc
sulphide screen and a microscope. The
scattered alpha-particles on striking
the screen produced brief light flashes
or scintillations. These flashes may be
viewed through a microscope and the
distribution of the number of scattered
particles may be studied as a function
of angle of scattering.
FIGURE 12.2 Schematic arrangement of the Geiger-Marsden experiment.
416
A typical graph of the total number of α-particles scattered at different
angles, in a given interval of time, is shown in Fig. 12.3. The dots in this
figure represent the data points and the solid curve is the theoretical
prediction based on the assumption that the target atom has a small,
dense, positively charged nucleus. Many of the α-particles pass through
the foil. It means that they do not suffer any collisions. Only about 0.14%
of the incident α-particles scatter by more than 1o; and about 1 in 8000
deflect by more than 90o. Rutherford argued that, to deflect the α-particle
backwards, it must experience a large repulsive force. This force couldAtoms
be provided if the greater part of the
mass of the atom and its positive charge
were concentrated tightly at its centre.
Then the incoming α-particle could get
very close to the positive charge without
penetrating it, and such a close
encounter would result in a large
deflection. This agreement supported
the hypothesis of the nuclear atom. This
is why Rutherford is credited with the
discovery of the nucleus.
In Rutherford’s nuclear model of
the atom, the entire positive charge and
most of the mass of the atom are
concentrated in the nucleus with the
electrons some distance away. The
electrons would be moving in orbits
FIGURE 12.3 Experimental data points (shown by
about the nucleus just as the planets
dots) on scattering of α-particles by a thin foil at
do around the sun. Rutherford’s
different angles obtained by Geiger and Marsden
experiments suggested the size of
using the setup shown in Figs. 12.1 and
the nucleus to be about 10 –15 m to
12.2. Rutherford’s nuclear model predicts the solid
10 –14 m. From kinetic theory, the size
curve which is seen to be in good agreement with
experiment.
of an atom was known to be 10 –10 m,
about 10,000 to 100,000 times larger
than the size of the nucleus (see Chapter 11, Section 11.6 in Class XI
Physics textbook). Thus, the electrons would seem to be at a distance
from the nucleus of about 10,000 to 100,000 times the size of the nucleus
itself. Thus, most of an atom is empty space. With the atom being largely
empty space, it is easy to see why most α-particles go right through a
thin metal foil. However, when α-particle happens to come near a nucleus,
the intense electric field there scatters it through a large angle. The atomic
electrons, being so light, do not appreciably affect the α-particles.
The scattering data shown in Fig. 12.3 can be analysed by employing
Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom. As the gold foil is very thin, it
can be assumed that α-particles will suffer not more than one scattering
during their passage through it. Therefore, computation of the trajectory
of an alpha-particle scattered by a single nucleus is enough. Alpha-
particles are nuclei of helium atoms and, therefore, carry two units, 2e,
of positive charge and have the mass of the helium atom. The charge of
the gold nucleus is Ze, where Z is the atomic number of the atom; for
gold Z = 79. Since the nucleus of gold is about 50 times heavier than an
α-particle, it is reasonable to assume that it remains stationary
throughout the scattering process. Under these assumptions, the
trajectory of an alpha-particle can be computed employing Newton’s
second law of motion and the Coulomb’s law for electrostatic
force of repulsion between the alpha-particle and the positively
417
charged nucleus.Physics
The magnitude of this force is
1 (2 e )( Ze )
F =
(12.1)
4 π ε 0
r 2
where r is the distance between the α-particle and the nucleus. The force
is directed along the line joining the α-particle and the nucleus. The
magnitude and direction of the force on an α-particle continuously
changes as it approaches the nucleus and recedes away from it.
12.2.1 Alpha-particle trajectory
The trajectory traced by an α-particle depends on the impact parameter,
b of collision. The impact parameter is the perpendicular distance of the
initial velocity vector of the α-particle from the centre of the nucleus (Fig.
12.4). A given beam of α-particles has a
distribution of impact parameters b, so that
the beam is scattered in various directions
with different probabilities (Fig. 12.4). (In
a beam, all particles have nearly same
kinetic energy.) It is seen that an α-particle
close to the nucleus (small impact
parameter) suffers large scattering. In case
of head-on collision, the impact parameter
is minimum and the α-particle rebounds
back ( θ ≅ π). For a large impact parameter,
the α-particle goes nearly undeviated and
has a small deflection ( θ ≅ 0).
FIGURE 12.4 Trajectory of α-particles in the
The fact that only a small fraction of the
coulomb field of a target nucleus. The impact
number of incident particles rebound back
parameter, b and scattering angle θ
indicates that the number of α-particles
are also depicted.
undergoing head on collision is small. This,
in turn, implies that the mass of the atom is concentrated in a small
volume. Rutherford scattering therefore, is a powerful way to determine
an upper limit to the size of the nucleus.
418
Example 12.1 In the Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom, the
nucleus (radius about 10 –15 m) is analogous to the sun about which
the electron move in orbit (radius ≈ 10 –10 m) like the earth orbits
around the sun. If the dimensions of the solar system had the same
proportions as those of the atom, would the earth be closer to or
farther away from the sun than actually it is ? The radius of earth’s
orbit is about 1.5 × 10 11 m. The radius of sun is taken as 7 × 10 8 m.
Solution The ratio of the radius of electron’s orbit to the radius of
nucleus is (10 –10 m)/(10 –15 m) = 10 5 , that is, the radius of the electron’s
orbit is 10 5 times larger than the radius of nucleus. If the radius of
the earth’s orbit around the sun were 10 5 times larger than the radius
of the sun, the radius of the earth’s orbit would be 10 5 × 7 × 10 8 m =
7 × 10 13 m. This is more than 100 times greater than the actual orbital
radius of earth. Thus, the earth would be much farther away from
the sun.
It implies that an atom contains a much greater fraction of empty
space than our solar system does.Atoms
Example 12.2 In a Geiger-Marsden experiment, what is the distance
of closest approach to the nucleus of a 7.7 MeV α-particle before it
comes momentarily to rest and reverses its direction?
1 (2 e )( Ze ) 2 Ze 2
=
4 π ε 0
4 π ε 0 d
d
Thus the distance of closest approach d is given by
d =
2 Ze 2
4 π ε 0 K
The maximum kinetic energy found in α-particles of natural origin is
7.7 MeV or 1.2 × 10 –12 J. Since 1/4πε 0 = 9.0 × 10 9 N m 2 /C 2 . Therefore
with e = 1.6 × 10 –19 C, we have,
(2)(9.0 × 10 9 Nm 2 / C 2 )(1.6 × 10 –19 C ) 2 Z
1.2 × 10 − 12 J
–16
= 3.84 × 10 Z m
The atomic number of foil material gold is Z = 79, so that
d =
d (Au) = 3.0 × 10 –14 m = 30 fm. (1 fm (i.e. fermi) = 10 –15 m.)
The radius of gold nucleus is, therefore, less than 3.0 × 10 –14 m. This
is not in very good agreement with the observed result as the actual
radius of gold nucleus is 6 fm. The cause of discrepancy is that the
distance of closest approach is considerably larger than the sum of
the radii of the gold nucleus and the α-particle. Thus, the α-particle
reverses its motion without ever actually touching the gold nucleus.
K =
ucl
Solution The key idea here is that throughout the scattering process,
the total mechanical energy of the system consisting of an α-particle
and a gold nucleus is conserved. The system’s initial mechanical
energy is E i , before the particle and nucleus interact, and it is equal
to its mechanical energy E f when the α-particle momentarily stops.
The initial energy E i is just the kinetic energy K of the incoming
α- particle. The final energy E f is just the electric potential energy U
of the system. The potential energy U can be calculated from
Eq. (12.1).
Let d be the centre-to-centre distance between the α-particle and
the gold nucleus when the α-particle is at its stopping point. Then
we can write the conservation of energy E i = E f as
12.2.2 Electron orbits
The Rutherford nuclear model of the atom which involves classical
concepts, pictures the atom as an electrically neutral sphere consisting
of a very small, massive and positively charged nucleus at the centre
surrounded by the revolving electrons in their respective dynamically
stable orbits. The electrostatic force of attraction, F e between the revolving
electrons and the nucleus provides the requisite centripetal force (F c ) to
keep them in their orbits. Thus, for a dynamically stable orbit in a
hydrogen atom
F e = F c
mv 2
1 e 2
=
r
4 π ε 0 r 2
(12.2)
419Physics
Thus the relation between the orbit radius and the electron
velocity is
e 2
4 π ε 0 mv 2
r =
(12.3)
The kinetic energy (K ) and electrostatic potential energy (U ) of the electron
in hydrogen atom are
K =
1
e 2
e 2
mv 2 =
and U = −
2
8 π ε 0 r
4 π ε 0 r
(The negative sign in U signifies that the electrostatic force is in the –r
direction.) Thus the total energy E of the electron in a hydrogen atom is
E = K + U =
e 2
e 2
−
8 π ε 0 r 4 π ε 0 r
=−
e 2
8 π ε 0 r
(12.4)
The total energy of the electron is negative. This implies the fact that
the electron is bound to the nucleus. If E were positive, an electron will
not follow a closed orbit around the nucleus.
Example 12.3 It is found experimentally that 13.6 eV energy is
required to separate a hydrogen atom into a proton and an electron.
Compute the orbital radius and the velocity of the electron in a
hydrogen atom.
Solution Total energy of the electron in hydrogen atom is –13.6 eV =
–13.6 × 1.6 × 10 –19 J = –2.2 ×10 –18 J. Thus from Eq. (12.4), we have
−
e 2
= − 2.2 × 10 − 18 J
8 π ε 0 r
This gives the orbital radius
r =−
e 2
(9 × 10 9 N m 2 /C 2 )(1.6 × 10 − 19 C) 2
=−
8 π ε 0 E
(2)(–2.2 × 10 − 18 J)
= 5.3 × 10 –11 m.
The velocity of the revolving electron can be computed from Eq. (12.3)
with m = 9.1 × 10 –31 kg,
v =
e
= 2.2 × 10 6 m/s.
4 π ε 0 mr
12.3 A TOMIC S PECTRA
420
As mentioned in Section 12.1, each element has a characteristic spectrum
of radiation, which it emits. When an atomic gas or vapour is excited at
low pressure, usually by passing an electric current through it, the emitted
radiation has a spectrum which contains certain specific wavelengths
only. A spectrum of this kind is termed as emission line spectrum and itAtoms
consists of bright lines on a
dark
background.
The
spectrum emitted by atomic
hydrogen is shown in
Fig. 12.5. Study of emission
line spectra of a material can
therefore serve as a type of
“fingerprint” for identification
of the gas. When white light
passes through a gas and we
analyse the transmitted light
using a spectrometer we find
some dark lines in the
FIGURE 12.5 Emission lines in the spectrum of hydrogen.
spectrum. These dark lines
correspond precisely to those wavelengths which were found in the
emission line spectrum of the gas. This is called the absorption spectrum
of the material of the gas.
12.3.1 Spectral series
We might expect that the frequencies of the light emitted by a particular
element would exhibit some regular pattern. Hydrogen is the simplest
atom and therefore, has the simplest spectrum. In the observed spectrum,
however, at first sight, there does not seem to be
any resemblance of order or regularity in spectral
lines. But the spacing between lines within certain
sets of the hydrogen spectrum decreases in a
regular way (Fig. 12.5). Each of these sets is called
a spectral series. In 1885, the first such series was
observed by a Swedish school teacher Johann Jakob
Balmer (1825–1898) in the visible region of the
hydrogen spectrum. This series is called Balmer
series (Fig. 12.6). The line with the longest
wavelength, 656.3 nm in the red is called H α ; the
FIGURE 12.6 Balmer series in the
next line with wavelength 486.1 nm in the blue-
emission spectrum of hydrogen.
green is called H β , the third line 434.1 nm in the
violet is called H γ ; and so on. As the wavelength
decreases, the lines appear closer together and are weaker in intensity.
Balmer found a simple empirical formula for the observed wavelengths
1
1 
 1
= R  2 − 2 
(12.5)
 2 n 
where λ is the wavelength, R is a constant called the Rydberg constant,
and n may have integral values 3, 4, 5, etc. The value of R is 1.097 × 10 7 m –1 .
This equation is also called Balmer formula.
Taking n = 3 in Eq. (12.5), one obtains the wavelength of the H α line:
λ
1
1 
 1
= 1.097 × 10 7  2 − 2  m –1

λ
2
3 
6
–1
= 1.522 × 10 m
i.e., λ = 656.3 nm
421Physics
For n = 4, one obtains the wavelength of H β line, etc. For n = ∞, one obtains
the limit of the series, at λ = 364.6 nm. This is the shortest wavelength in
the Balmer series. Beyond this limit, no further distinct lines appear,
instead only a faint continuous spectrum is seen.
Other series of spectra for hydrogen were subsequently discovered.
These are known, after their discoverers, as Lyman, Paschen, Brackett,
and Pfund series. These are represented by the formulae:
Lyman series:
1
 1 1 
= R  2 − 2 
 1 n 
λ
n = 2,3,4... (12.6)
n = 4,5,6... (12.7)
n = 5,6,7... (12.8)
Paschen series:
1
1 
 1
= R  2 − 2 
 3 n 
λ
Brackett series:
1
1 
 1
= R  2 − 2 
 4
n 
Pfund series:
λ
1
1 
 1
= R  2 − 2 
n = 6,7,8...
(12.9)
 5
λ
n 
The Lyman series is in the ultraviolet, and the Paschen and Brackett
series are in the infrared region.
The Balmer formula Eq. (12.5) may be written in terms of frequency
of the light, recalling that
c = νλ
or
1
=
ν
λ c
Thus, Eq. (12.5) becomes
1 
 1
−
(12.10)
 2 2 n 2  
There are only a few elements (hydrogen, singly ionised helium, and
doubly ionised lithium) whose spectra can be represented by simple
formula like Eqs. (12.5) – (12.9).
Equations (12.5) – (12.9) are useful as they give the wavelengths that
hydrogen atoms radiate or absorb. However, these results are empirical
and do not give any reasoning why only certain frequencies are observed
in the hydrogen spectrum.
ν = Rc 
12.4 B OHR M ODEL
422
OF THE
H YDROGEN A TOM
The model of the atom proposed by Rutherford assumes that the atom,
consisting of a central nucleus and revolving electron is stable much like
sun-planet system which the model imitates. However, there are some
fundamental differences between the two situations. While the planetary
system is held by gravitational force, the nucleus-electron system being
charged objects, interact by Coulomb’s Law of force. We know that anAtoms
Niels Henrik David Bohr
(1885 – 1962) Danish
physicist who explained the
spectrum of hydrogen atom
based on quantum ideas.
He gave a theory of nuclear
fission based on the liquid-
drop model of nucleus.
Bohr contributed to the
clarification of conceptual
problems in quantum
mechanics, in particular by
proposing the comple-
mentary principle.
object which moves in a circle is being constantly
accelerated – the acceleration being centripetal in nature.
According to classical electromagnetic theory, an
accelerating charged particle emits radiation in the form
of electromagnetic waves. The energy of an accelerating
electron should therefore, continuously decrease. The
electron would spiral inward and eventually fall into the
nucleus (Fig. 12.7). Thus, such an atom can not be stable.
Further, according to the classical electromagnetic theory,
the frequency of the electromagnetic waves emitted by
the revolving electrons is equal to the frequency of
revolution. As the electrons spiral inwards, their angular
velocities and hence their frequencies would change
continuously, and so will the frequency of the light
emitted. Thus, they would emit a continuous spectrum,
in contradiction to the line spectrum actually observed.
Clearly Rutherford model tells only a part of the story
implying that the classical ideas are not sufficient to
explain the atomic structure.
FIGURE 12.7 An accelerated atomic electron must spiral into the
nucleus as it loses energy.
Example 12.4 According to the classical electromagnetic theory,
calculate the initial frequency of the light emitted by the electron
revolving around a proton in hydrogen atom.
Solution From Example 12.3 we know that velocity of electron moving
around a proton in hydrogen atom in an orbit of radius 5.3 × 10 –11 m
is 2.2 × 10 –6 m/s. Thus, the frequency of the electron moving around
the proton is
ν =
(
15
)
≈ 6.6 × 10 Hz.
According to the classical electromagnetic theory we know that the
frequency of the electromagnetic waves emitted by the revolving
electrons is equal to the frequency of its revolution around the nucleus.
Thus the initial frequency of the light emitted is 6.6 × 10 15 Hz.
v
2.2 × 10 6 m s − 1
=
2 π r 2 π 5.3 × 10 − 11 m
423Physics
It was Niels Bohr (1885 – 1962) who made certain modifications in
this model by adding the ideas of the newly developing quantum
hypothesis. Niels Bohr studied in Rutherford’s laboratory for several
months in 1912 and he was convinced about the validity of Rutherford
nuclear model. Faced with the dilemma as discussed above, Bohr, in
1913, concluded that in spite of the success of electromagnetic theory in
explaining large-scale phenomena, it could not be applied to the processes
at the atomic scale. It became clear that a fairly radical departure from
the established principles of classical mechanics and electromagnetism
would be needed to understand the structure of atoms and the relation
of atomic structure to atomic spectra. Bohr combined classical and early
quantum concepts and gave his theory in the form of three postulates.
These are :
(i) Bohr’s first postulate was that an electron in an atom could revolve
in certain stable orbits without the emission of radiant energy,
contrary to the predictions of electromagnetic theory. According to
this postulate, each atom has certain definite stable states in which it
can exist, and each possible state has definite total energy. These are
called the stationary states of the atom.
(ii) Bohr’s second postulate defines these stable orbits. This postulate
states that the electron revolves around the nucleus only in those
orbits for which the angular momentum is some integral multiple of
h/2π where h is the Planck’s constant (= 6.6 × 10 –34 J s). Thus the
angular momentum (L) of the orbiting electron is quantised. That is
(12.11)
L = nh/2π
(iii) Bohr’s third postulate incorporated into atomic theory the early
quantum concepts that had been developed by Planck and Einstein.
It states that an electron might make a transition from one of its
specified non-radiating orbits to another of lower energy. When it
does so, a photon is emitted having energy equal to the energy
difference between the initial and final states. The frequency of the
emitted photon is then given by
h ν = E i – E f
(12.12)
where E i and E f are the energies of the initial and final states and E i > E f .
For a hydrogen atom, Eq. (12.4) gives the expression to determine
the energies of different energy states. But then this equation requires
the radius r of the electron orbit. To calculate r, Bohr’s second postulate
about the angular momentum of the electron–the quantisation
condition – is used. The angular momentum L is given by
L = mvr
Bohr’s second postulate of quantisation [Eq. (12.11)] says that the
allowed values of angular momentum are integral multiples of h/2π.
L n = mv n r n =
424
nh
2 π
(12.13)
where n is an integer, r n is the radius of n th possible orbit and v n is the
speed of moving electron in the n th orbit. The allowed orbits are numberedAtoms
1, 2, 3 ..., according to the values of n, which is called the principal
quantum number of the orbit.
From Eq. (12.3), the relation between v n and r n is
e
v n =
4 π ε 0 mr n
Combining it with Eq. (12.13), we get the following expressions for v n
and r n ,
1 e 2
1
n 4 π ε 0 ( h 2 π )
v n =
(12.14)
and
2
 n 2   h  4 π ε 0
r n =    
 m   2 π  e 2
(12.15)
Eq. (12.14) depicts that the orbital speed in the n th orbit falls by a factor
of n. Using Eq. (12.15), the size of the innermost orbit (n = 1) can be
obtained as
r 1 =
h 2 ε 0
π me 2
This is called the Bohr radius, represented by the symbol a 0 . Thus,
h 2 ε 0
(12.16)
π me 2
Substitution of values of h, m, ε 0 and e gives a 0 = 5.29 × 10 –11 m. From
Eq. (12.15), it can also be seen that the radii of the orbits increase as n 2 .
The total energy of the electron in the stationary states of the hydrogen
atom can be obtained by substituting the value of orbital radius in Eq.
(12.4) as
a 0 =
2
 e 2   m   2 π   e 2 
E n = − 
  
 8 π ε 0    n 2   h    4 π ε 0  
or E n = −
me 4
8 n 2 ε 0 2 h 2
(12.17)
Substituting values, Eq. (12.17) yields
E n = −
2.18 × 10 − 18
J
n 2
(12.18)
Atomic energies are often expressed in electron volts (eV) rather than
joules. Since 1 eV = 1.6 × 10 –19 J, Eq. (12.18) can be rewritten as
13.6
eV
(12.19)
n 2
The negative sign of the total energy of an electron moving in an orbit
means that the electron is bound with the nucleus. Energy will thus be
required to remove the electron from the hydrogen atom to a distance
infinitely far away from its nucleus (or proton in hydrogen atom).
E n = −
425Physics
The derivation of Eqs. (12.17) – (12.19) involves the assumption that
the electronic orbits are circular, though orbits under inverse square
force are, in general elliptical. (Planets move in elliptical orbits under the
inverse square gravitational force of the sun.) However, it was shown by
the German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld (1868 – 1951) that, when the
restriction of circular orbit is relaxed, these equations continue to hold
even for elliptic orbits.
O RBIT
VS STATE ( ORBITAL PICTURE ) OF ELECTRON IN ATOM
426
We are introduced to the Bohr Model of atom one time or the other in the course of
physics. This model has its place in the history of quantum mechanics and particularly
in explaining the structure of an atom. It has become a milestone since Bohr introduced
the revolutionary idea of definite energy orbits for the electrons, contrary to the classical
picture requiring an accelerating particle to radiate. Bohr also introduced the idea of
quantisation of angular momentum of electrons moving in definite orbits. Thus it was a
semi-classical picture of the structure of atom.
Now with the development of quantum mechanics, we have a better understanding
of the structure of atom. Solutions of the Schrödinger wave equation assign a wave-like
description to the electrons bound in an atom due to attractive forces of the protons.
An orbit of the electron in the Bohr model is the circular path of motion of an electron
around the nucleus. But according to quantum mechanics, we cannot associate a definite
path with the motion of the electrons in an atom. We can only talk about the probability
of finding an electron in a certain region of space around the nucleus. This probability
can be inferred from the one-electron wave function called the orbital. This function
depends only on the coordinates of the electron.
It is therefore essential that we understand the subtle differences that exist in the two
models:
l
Bohr model is valid for only one-electron atoms/ions; an energy value, assigned to
each orbit, depends on the principal quantum number n in this model. We know
that energy associated with a stationary state of an electron depends on n only, for
one-electron atoms/ions. For a multi-electron atom/ion, this is not true.
l
The solution of the Schrödinger wave equation, obtained for hydrogen-like atoms/
ions, called the wave function, gives information about the probability of finding an
electron in various regions around the nucleus. This orbital has no resemblance
whatsoever with the orbit defined for an electron in the Bohr model.
Example 12.5 A 10 kg satellite circles earth once every 2 h in an
orbit having a radius of 8000 km. Assuming that Bohr’s angular
momentum postulate applies to satellites just as it does to an electron
in the hydrogen atom, find the quantum number of the orbit of the
satellite.
Solution
From Eq. (12.13), we have
m v n r n = nh/2πAtoms
Here m = 10 kg and r n = 8 × 10 6 m. We have the time period T of the
circling satellite as 2 h. That is T = 7200 s.
Thus the velocity v n = 2π r n /T.
The quantum number of the orbit of satellite
n = (2π r n ) 2 × m/(T × h).
Substituting the values,
n = (2π × 8 × 10 6 m) 2 × 10/(7200 s × 6.64 × 10 –34 J s)
= 5.3 × 10 45
Note that the quantum number for the satellite motion is extremely
large! In fact for such large quantum numbers the results of
quantisation conditions tend to those of classical physics.
12.4.1 Energy levels
The energy of an atom is the least (largest negative value)
when its electron is revolving in an orbit closest to the
nucleus i.e., the one for which n = 1. For n = 2, 3, ... the
absolute value of the energy E is smaller, hence the energy
is progressively larger in the outer orbits. The lowest state
of the atom, called the ground state, is that of the lowest
energy, with the electron revolving in the orbit of smallest
radius, the Bohr radius, a 0 . The energy of this state (n = 1),
E 1 is –13.6 eV. Therefore, the minimum energy required to
free the electron from the ground state of the hydrogen atom
is 13.6 eV. It is called the ionisation energy of the hydrogen
atom. This prediction of the Bohr’s model is in excellent
agreement with the experimental value of ionisation energy.
At room temperature, most of the hydrogen atoms are
in ground state. When a hydrogen atom receives energy
by processes such as electron collisions, the atom may
acquire sufficient energy to raise the electron to higher
energy states. The atom is then said to be in an excited
state. From Eq. (12.19), for n = 2; the energy E 2 is
–3.40 eV. It means that the energy required to excite an
electron in hydrogen atom to its first excited state, is an
energy equal to E 2 – E 1 = –3.40 eV – (–13.6) eV = 10.2 eV.
Similarly, E 3 = –1.51 eV and E 3 – E 1 = 12.09 eV, or to excite
the hydrogen atom from its ground state (n = 1) to second
excited state (n = 3), 12.09 eV energy is required, and so
on. From these excited states the electron can then fall back
to a state of lower energy, emitting a photon in the process.
Thus, as the excitation of hydrogen atom increases (that is
as n increases) the value of minimum energy required to
free the electron from the excited atom decreases.
The energy level diagram* for the stationary states of a
hydrogen atom, computed from Eq. (12.19), is given in
FIGURE 12.8 The energy level
diagram for the hydrogen atom.
The electron in a hydrogen atom
at room temperature spends
most of its time in the ground
state. To ionise a hydrogen
atom an electron from the
ground state, 13.6 eV of energy
must be supplied. (The horizontal
lines specify the presence of
allowed energy states.)
* An electron can have any total energy above E = 0 eV. In such situations the
electron is free. Thus there is a continuum of energy states above E = 0 eV, as
shown in Fig. 12.8.
427Physics
Fig. 12.8. The principal quantum number n labels the stationary
states in the ascending order of energy. In this diagram, the highest
energy state corresponds to n = ∞ in Eq, (12.19) and has an energy
of 0 eV. This is the energy of the atom when the electron is
completely removed (r = ∞) from the nucleus and is at rest. Observe how
the energies of the excited states come closer and closer together as n
increases.
F RANCK – H ERTZ
EXPERIMENT
The existence of discrete energy levels in an atom was directly verified in 1914 by James
Franck and Gustav Hertz. They studied the spectrum of mercury vapour when electrons
having different kinetic energies passed through the vapour. The electron energy was
varied by subjecting the electrons to electric fields of varying strength. The electrons
collide with the mercury atoms and can transfer energy to the mercury atoms. This can
only happen when the energy of the electron is higher than the energy difference between
an energy level of Hg occupied by an electron and a higher unoccupied level (see Figure).
For instance, the difference between an occupied energy level of Hg and a higher
unoccupied level is 4.9 eV. If an electron of having an energy of 4.9 eV or more passes
through mercury, an electron in mercury atom can absorb energy from the bombarding
electron and get excited to the higher level [Fig (a)]. The colliding electron’s kinetic energy
would reduce by this amount.
The excited electron would subsequently fall back to the ground state by emission of
radiation [Fig. (b)]. The wavelength of emitted radiation is:
λ =
hc 6.625 × 10 − 34 × 3 × 10 8
=
= 253 nm
E
4.9 × 1.6 × 10 − 19
By direct measurement, Franck and Hertz found that the emission spectrum of
mercury has a line corresponding to this wavelength. For this experimental verification
of Bohr’s basic ideas of discrete energy levels in atoms and the process of photon emission,
Frank and Hertz were awarded the Nobel prize in 1925.
12.5 T HE L INE S PECTRA
428
OF THE
H YDROGEN A TOM
According to the third postulate of Bohr’s model, when an atom makes a
transition from the higher energy state with quantum number n i to the
lower energy state with quantum number n f (n f < n i ), the difference of
energy is carried away by a photon of frequency ν if such thatAtoms
h ν if = En i – En f
Using Eq. (12.16), for En f and En i , we get (12.20)
h ν if = (12.21)
or ν if = (12.22)
Equation (12.21) is the Rydberg formula, for the spectrum of the
hydrogen atom. In this relation, if we take n f = 2 and n i = 3, 4, 5..., it
reduces to a form similar to Eq. (12.10) for the Balmer series. The Rydberg
constant R is readily identified to be
me 4
R = 2 3
8 ε 0 h c
(12.23)
If we insert the values of various constants in Eq. (12.23), we get
R = 1.03 × 10 7 m –1
This is a value very close to the value (1.097 × 10 7 m –1 ) obtained from the
empirical Balmer formula. This agreement between the theoretical and
experimental values of the Rydberg constant provided a direct and
striking confirmation of the Bohr’s model.
Since both n f and n i are integers,
this immediately shows that in
transitions between different atomic
levels, light is radiated in various
discrete frequencies. For hydrogen
spectrum, the Balmer formula
corresponds to n f = 2 and n i = 3, 4, 5,
etc. The results of the Bohr’s model
suggested the presence of other series
spectra for hydrogen atom–those
corresponding to transitions resulting
from n f = 1 and n i = 2, 3, etc.; n f = 3
and n i = 4, 5, etc., and so on. Such
series were identified in the course of
spectroscopic investigations and are
known as the L yman, Balmer,
Paschen, Brackett, and Pfund series.
The
electronic
transitions
corresponding to these series are
shown in Fig. 12.9.
The various lines in the atomic
spectra are produced when electrons
jump from higher energy state to a
lower energy state and photons are
emitted. These spectral lines are called
emission lines. But when an atom
FIGURE 12.9 Line spectra originate in
transitions between energy levels.
absorbs a photon that has precisely
429Physics
the same energy needed by the electron in a lower energy state to make
transitions to a higher energy state, the process is called absorption.
Thus if photons with a continuous range of frequencies pass through a
rarefied gas and then are analysed with a spectrometer, a series of dark
spectral absorption lines appear in the continuous spectrum. The dark
lines indicate the frequencies that have been absorbed by the atoms of
the gas.
The explanation of the hydrogen atom spectrum provided by Bohr’s
model was a brilliant achievement, which greatly stimulated progress
towards the modern quantum theory. In 1922, Bohr was awarded Nobel
Prize in Physics.
Example 12.6 Using the Rydberg formula, calculate the wavelengths
of the first four spectral lines in the Lyman series of the hydrogen
spectrum.
Solution The Rydberg formula is
hc/λ if =
me 4
8 ε 0 2 h 2
 1
1 
 n 2 − n 2 
 f
i 
The wavelengths of the first four lines in the Lyman series correspond
to transitions from n i = 2,3,4,5 to n f = 1. We know that
me 4
= 13.6 eV = 21.76 ×10 –19 J
8 ε 0 2 h 2
Therefore,
λ i 1 =
=
hc
 1 1 
21.76 × 10 − 19  − 2 
 1 n i 
m
6 . 625 × 10 − 34 × 3 × 10 8 × n i 2
m =
21.76 × 10 − 19 × ( n i 2 − 1)
0.9134 n i 2
× 10 − 7 m
( n i 2 − 1)
= 913.4 n i2 /(n i2 –1) Å
Substituting n i = 2,3,4,5, we get λ 21 = 1218 Å, λ 31 = 1028 Å, λ 41 = 974.3 Å,
and λ 51 = 951.4 Å.
12.6 D E B ROGLIE ’ S E XPLANATION OF B OHR ’ S
S ECOND P OSTULATE OF Q UANTISATION
430
Of all the postulates, Bohr made in his model of the atom, perhaps the
most puzzling is his second postulate. It states that the angular
momentum of the electron orbiting around the nucleus is quantised (that
is, L n = nh/2π; n = 1, 2, 3 ...). Why should the angular momentum have
only those values that are integral multiples of h/2π? The French physicist
Louis de Broglie explained this puzzle in 1923, ten years after Bohr
proposed his model.
We studied, in Chapter 11, about the de Broglie’s hypothesis that
material particles, such as electrons, also have a wave nature. C. J. Davisson
and L. H. Germer later experimentally verified the wave nature of electronsAtoms
in 1927. Louis de Broglie argued that the electron in its
circular orbit, as proposed by Bohr, must be seen as a particle
wave. In analogy to waves travelling on a string, particle waves
too can lead to standing waves under resonant conditions.
From Chapter 15 of Class XI Physics textbook, we know that
when a string is plucked, a vast number of wavelengths are
excited. However only those wavelengths survive which have
nodes at the ends and form the standing wave in the string. It
means that in a string, standing waves are formed when the
total distance travelled by a wave down the string and back is
one wavelength, two wavelengths, or any integral number of
wavelengths. Waves with other wavelengths interfere with
themselves upon reflection and their amplitudes quickly drop
to zero. For an electron moving in n th circular orbit of radius
r n , the total distance is the circumference of the orbit, 2πr n .
Thus
n = 1, 2, 3...
(12.24)
2π r n = n λ ,
FIGURE 12.10 A standing
wave is shown on a circular
orbit where four de Broglie
wavelengths fit into the
circumference of the orbit.
Figure 12.10 illustrates a standing particle wave on a
circular orbit for n = 4, i.e., 2πr n = 4 λ , where λ is the de Broglie
wavelength of the electron moving in n th orbit. From Chapter
11, we have λ = h/p, where p is the magnitude of the electron’s
momentum. If the speed of the electron is much less than the speed of
light, the momentum is mv n . Thus, λ = h/mv n . From Eq. (12.24), we have
2π r n = n h/mv n
or
m v n r n = nh/2π
This is the quantum condition proposed by Bohr for the angular
momentum of the electron [Eq. (12.13)]. In Section 12.5, we saw that
this equation is the basis of explaining the discrete orbits and energy
levels in hydrogen atom. Thus de Broglie hypothesis provided an
explanation for Bohr’s second postulate for the quantisation of angular
momentum of the orbiting electron. The quantised electron orbits and
energy states are due to the wave nature of the electron and only resonant
standing waves can persist.
Bohr’s model, involving classical trajectory picture (planet-like electron
orbiting the nucleus), correctly predicts the gross features of the
hydrogenic atoms*, in particular, the frequencies of the radiation emitted
or selectively absorbed. This model however has many limitations.
Some are:
(i) The Bohr model is applicable to hydrogenic atoms. It cannot be
extended even to mere two electron atoms such as helium. The analysis
of atoms with more than one electron was attempted on the lines of
Bohr’s model for hydrogenic atoms but did not meet with any success.
Difficulty lies in the fact that each electron interacts not only with the
positively charged nucleus but also with all other electrons.
* Hydrogenic atoms are the atoms consisting of a nucleus with positive charge
+Ze and a single electron, where Z is the proton number. Examples are hydrogen
atom, singly ionised helium, doubly ionised lithium, and so forth. In these
atoms more complex electron-electron interactions are nonexistent.
431Physics
The formulation of Bohr model involves electrical force between
positively charged nucleus and electron. It does not include the
electrical forces between electrons which necessarily appear in
multi-electron atoms.
(ii) While the Bohr’s model correctly predicts the frequencies of the light
emitted by hydrogenic atoms, the model is unable to explain the
relative intensities of the frequencies in the spectrum. In emission
spectrum of hydrogen, some of the visible frequencies have weak
intensity, others strong. Why? Experimental observations depict that
some transitions are more favoured than others. Bohr’s model is
unable to account for the intensity variations.
Bohr’s model presents an elegant picture of an atom and cannot be
generalised to complex atoms. For complex atoms we have to use a new
and radical theory based on Quantum Mechanics, which provides a more
complete picture of the atomic structure.
L ASER
LIGHT
Imagine a crowded market place or a railway platform with people entering a gate and
going towards all directions. Their footsteps are random and there is no phase correlation
between them. On the other hand, think of a large number of soldiers in a regulated march.
Their footsteps are very well correlated. See figure here.
This is similar to the difference between light emitted by
an ordinary source like a candle or a bulb and that emitted
by a laser. The acronym LASER stands for Light Amplification
by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Since its development
in 1960, it has entered into all areas of science and technology.
It has found applications in physics, chemistry, biology,
medicine, surgery, engineering, etc. There are low power
lasers, with a power of 0.5 mW, called pencil lasers, which
serve as pointers. There are also lasers of different power,
suitable for delicate surgery of eye or glands in the stomach.
Finally, there are lasers which can cut or weld steel.
Light is emitted from a source in the form of packets of
waves. Light coming out from an ordinary source contains a mixture of many wavelengths.
There is also no phase relation between the various waves. Therefore, such light, even if it is
passed through an aperture, spreads very fast and the beam size increases rapidly with
distance. In the case of laser light, the wavelength of each packet is almost the same. Also
the average length of the packet of waves is much larger. This means that there is better
phase correlation over a longer duration of time. This results in reducing the divergence of
a laser beam substantially.
If there are N atoms in a source, each emitting light with intensity I, then the total
intensity produced by an ordinary source is proportional to NI, whereas in a laser source,
it is proportional to N 2 I. Considering that N is very large, we see that the light from a laser
can be much stronger than that from an ordinary source.
When astronauts of the Apollo missions visited the moon, they placed a mirror on its
surface, facing the earth. Then scientists on the earth sent a strong laser beam, which was
reflected by the mirror on the moon and received back on the earth. The size of the reflected
laser beam and the time taken for the round trip were measured. This allowed a very
accurate determination of (a) the extremely small divergence of a laser beam and (b) the
distance of the moon from the earth.
432Atoms
SUMMARY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Atom, as a whole, is electrically neutral and therefore contains equal
amount of positive and negative charges.
In Thomson’s model, an atom is a spherical cloud of positive charges
with electrons embedded in it.
In Rutherford’s model, most of the mass of the atom and all its positive
charge are concentrated in a tiny nucleus (typically one by ten thousand
the size of an atom), and the electrons revolve around it.
Rutherford nuclear model has two main difficulties in explaining the
structure of atom: (a) It predicts that atoms are unstable because the
accelerated electrons revolving around the nucleus must spiral into
the nucleus. This contradicts the stability of matter. (b) It cannot
explain the characteristic line spectra of atoms of different elements.
Atoms of each element are stable and emit characteristic spectrum.
The spectrum consists of a set of isolated parallel lines termed as line
spectrum. It provides useful information about the atomic structure.
The atomic hydrogen emits a line spectrum consisting of various series.
The frequency of any line in a series can be expressed as a difference
of two terms;
 1 1 
; n = 2, 3, 4,...
−
 1 2 n 2  
Lyman series: ν = Rc 
1 
 1
Balmer series: ν = Rc  2 − 2  ; n = 3, 4, 5,...
 2 n 
1 
 1
Paschen series: ν = Rc  2 − 2  ; n = 4, 5, 6,...
 3 n 
1 
 1
; n = 5, 6, 7,...
−
 4 2 n 2  
Brackett series: ν = Rc 
7.
1 
 1
Pfund series: ν = Rc  2 − 2  ; n = 6, 7, 8,...
 5 n 
To explain the line spectra emitted by atoms, as well as the stability
of atoms, Niel’s Bohr proposed a model for hydrogenic (single elctron)
atoms. He introduced three postulates and laid the foundations of
quantum mechanics:
(a) In a hydrogen atom, an electron revolves in certain stable orbits
(called stationary orbits) without the emission of radiant energy.
(b) The stationary orbits are those for which the angular momentum
is some integral multiple of h/2π. (Bohr’s quantisation condition.)
That is L = nh/2π, where n is an integer called a quantum number.
(c) The third postulate states that an electron might make a transition
from one of its specified non-radiating orbits to another of lower
energy. When it does so, a photon is emitted having energy equal
to the energy difference between the initial and final states. The
frequency ( ν) of the emitted photon is then given by
h ν = E i – E f
An atom absorbs radiation of the same frequency the atom emits,
in which case the electron is transferred to an orbit with a higher
value of n.
E i + h ν = E f
433Physics
8.
As a result of the quantisation condition of angular momentum, the
electron orbits the nucleus at only specific radii. For a hydrogen atom
it is given by
2
 n 2   h  4 π ε 0
r n =    
 m   2 π  e 2
The total energy is also quantised:
E n = −
me 4
8 n 2 ε 0 2 h 2
= –13.6 eV/n 2
The n = 1 state is called ground state. In hydrogen atom the ground
state energy is –13.6 eV. Higher values of n correspond to excited
states (n > 1). Atoms are excited to these higher states by collisions
with other atoms or electrons or by absorption of a photon of right
frequency.
9. de Broglie’s hypothesis that electrons have a wavelength λ = h/mv gave
an explanation for Bohr’s quantised orbits by bringing in the wave-
particle duality. The orbits correspond to circular standing waves in
which the circumference of the orbit equals a whole number of
wavelengths.
10. Bohr’s model is applicable only to hydrogenic (single electron) atoms.
It cannot be extended to even two electron atoms such as helium.
This model is also unable to explain for the relative intensities of the
frequencies emitted even by hydrogenic atoms.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
434
Both the Thomson’s as well as the Rutherford’s models constitute an
unstable system. Thomson’s model is unstable electrostatically, while
Rutherford’s model is unstable because of electromagnetic radiation
of orbiting electrons.
What made Bohr quantise angular momentum (second postulate) and
not some other quantity? Note, h has dimensions of angular
momentum, and for circular orbits, angular momentum is a very
relevant quantity. The second postulate is then so natural!
The orbital picture in Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom was
inconsistent with the uncertainty principle. It was replaced by modern
quantum mechanics in which Bohr’s orbits are regions where the
electron may be found with large probability.
Unlike the situation in the solar system, where planet-planet
gravitational forces are very small as compared to the gravitational
force of the sun on each planet (because the mass of the sun is so
much greater than the mass of any of the planets), the electron-electron
electric force interaction is comparable in magnitude to the electron-
nucleus electrical force, because the charges and distances are of the
same order of magnitude. This is the reason why the Bohr’s model
with its planet-like electron is not applicable to many electron atoms.
Bohr laid the foundation of the quantum theory by postulating specific
orbits in which electrons do not radiate. Bohr’s model include onlyAtoms
6.
7.
one quantum number n. The new theory called quantum mechanics
supportes Bohr’s postulate. However in quantum mechanics (more
generally accepted), a given energy level may not correspond to just
one quantum state. For example, a state is characterised by four
quantum numbers (n, l, m, and s), but for a pure Coulomb potential
(as in hydrogen atom) the energy depends only on n.
In Bohr model, contrary to ordinary classical expectation, the
frequency of revolution of an electron in its orbit is not connected to
the frequency of spectral line. The later is the difference between two
orbital energies divided by h. For transitions between large quantum
numbers (n to n – 1, n very large), however, the two coincide as expected.
Bohr’s semiclassical model based on some aspects of classical physics
and some aspects of modern physics also does not provide a true
picture of the simplest hydrogenic atoms. The true picture is quantum
mechanical affair which differs from Bohr model in a number of
fundamental ways. But then if the Bohr model is not strictly correct,
why do we bother about it? The reasons which make Bohr’s model
still useful are:
(i) The model is based on just three postulates but accounts for almost
all the general features of the hydrogen spectrum.
(ii) The model incorporates many of the concepts we have learnt in
classical physics.
(iii) The model demonstrates how a theoretical physicist occasionally
must quite literally ignore certain problems of approach in hopes
of being able to make some predictions. If the predictions of the
theory or model agree with experiment, a theoretician then must
somehow hope to explain away or rationalise the problems that
were ignored along the way.
EXERCISES
12.1
12.2
Choose the correct alternative from the clues given at the end of
the each statement:
(a) The size of the atom in Thomson’s model is .......... the atomic
size in Rutherford’s model. (much greater than/no different
from/much less than.)
(b) In the ground state of .......... electrons are in stable equilibrium,
while in .......... electrons always experience a net force.
(Thomson’s model/ Rutherford’s model.)
(c) A classical atom based on .......... is doomed to collapse.
(Thomson’s model/ Rutherford’s model.)
(d) An atom has a nearly continuous mass distribution in a ..........
but has a highly non-uniform mass distribution in ..........
(Thomson’s model/ Rutherford’s model.)
(e) The positively charged part of the atom possesses most of the
mass in .......... (Rutherford’s model/both the models.)
Suppose you are given a chance to repeat the alpha-particle
scattering experiment using a thin sheet of solid hydrogen in place
of the gold foil. (Hydrogen is a solid at temperatures below 14 K.)
What results do you expect?
435Physics
What is the shortest wavelength present in the Paschen series of
spectral lines?
12.4 A difference of 2.3 eV separates two energy levels in an atom. What
is the frequency of radiation emitted when the atom make a
transition from the upper level to the lower level?
12.5 The ground state energy of hydrogen atom is –13.6 eV. What are the
kinetic and potential energies of the electron in this state?
12.6 A hydrogen atom initially in the ground level absorbs a photon,
which excites it to the n = 4 level. Determine the wavelength and
frequency of photon.
12.7 (a) Using the Bohr’s model calculate the speed of the electron in a
hydrogen atom in the n = 1, 2, and 3 levels. (b) Calculate the orbital
period in each of these levels.
12.8 The radius of the innermost electron orbit of a hydrogen atom is
5.3×10 –11 m. What are the radii of the n = 2 and n =3 orbits?
12.9 A 12.5 eV electron beam is used to bombard gaseous hydrogen at
room temperature. What series of wavelengths will be emitted?
12.10 In accordance with the Bohr’s model, find the quantum number
that characterises the earth’s revolution around the sun in an orbit
of radius 1.5 × 10 11 m with orbital speed 3 × 10 4 m/s. (Mass of earth
= 6.0 × 10 24 kg.)
12.3
ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
436
12.11 Answer the following questions, which help you understand the
difference between Thomson’s model and Rutherford’s model better.
(a) Is the average angle of deflection of α -particles by a thin gold foil
predicted by Thomson’s model much less, about the same, or
much greater than that predicted by Rutherford’s model?
(b) Is the probability of backward scattering (i.e., scattering of
α -particles at angles greater than 90°) predicted by Thomson’s
model much less, about the same, or much greater than that
predicted by Rutherford’s model?
(c) Keeping other factors fixed, it is found experimentally that for
small thickness t, the number of α -particles scattered at
moderate angles is proportional to t. What clue does this linear
dependence on t provide?
(d) In which model is it completely wrong to ignore multiple
scattering for the calculation of average angle of scattering of
α -particles by a thin foil?
12.12 The gravitational attraction between electron and proton in a
hydrogen atom is weaker than the coulomb attraction by a factor of
about 10 –40 . An alternative way of looking at this fact is to estimate
the radius of the first Bohr orbit of a hydrogen atom if the electron
and proton were bound by gravitational attraction. You will find the
answer interesting.
12.13 Obtain an expression for the frequency of radiation emitted when a
hydrogen atom de-excites from level n to level (n–1). For large n,
show that this frequency equals the classical frequency of revolution
of the electron in the orbit.Atoms
12.14 Classically, an electron can be in any orbit around the nucleus of
an atom. Then what determines the typical atomic size? Why is an
atom not, say, thousand times bigger than its typical size? The
question had greatly puzzled Bohr before he arrived at his famous
model of the atom that you have learnt in the text. To simulate what
he might well have done before his discovery, let us play as follows
with the basic constants of nature and see if we can get a quantity
with the dimensions of length that is roughly equal to the known
size of an atom (~ 10 –10 m).
(a) Construct a quantity with the dimensions of length from the
fundamental constants e, m e , and c. Determine its numerical
value.
(b) You will find that the length obtained in (a) is many orders of
magnitude smaller than the atomic dimensions. Further, it
involves c. But energies of atoms are mostly in non-relativistic
domain where c is not expected to play any role. This is what
may have suggested Bohr to discard c and look for ‘something
else’ to get the right atomic size. Now, the Planck’s constant h
had already made its appearance elsewhere. Bohr’s great insight
lay in recognising that h, m e , and e will yield the right atomic
size. Construct a quantity with the dimension of length from h,
me, and e and confirm that its numerical value has indeed the
correct order of magnitude.
12.15 The total energy of an electron in the first excited state of the
hydrogen atom is about –3.4 eV.
(a) What is the kinetic energy of the electron in this state?
(b) What is the potential energy of the electron in this state?
(c) Which of the answers above would change if the choice of the
zero of potential energy is changed?
12.16 If Bohr’s quantisation postulate (angular momentum = nh/2π) is a
basic law of nature, it should be equally valid for the case of planetary
motion also. Why then do we never speak of quantisation of orbits
of planets around the sun?
12.17 Obtain the first Bohr’s radius and the ground state energy of a
muonic hydrogen atom [i.e., an atom in which a negatively charged
muon (μ – ) of mass about 207m e orbits around a proton].
437
Physics
Chapter Thirteen
NUCLEI
13.1 I NTRODUCTION
In the previous chapter, we have learnt that in every atom, the positive
charge and mass are densely concentrated at the centre of the atom
forming its nucleus. The overall dimensions of a nucleus are much smaller
than those of an atom. Experiments on scattering of α -particles
demonstrated that the radius of a nucleus was smaller than the radius
of an atom by a factor of about 10 4 . This means the volume of a nucleus
is about 10 –12 times the volume of the atom. In other words, an atom is
almost empty. If an atom is enlarged to the size of a classroom, the nucleus
would be of the size of pinhead. Nevertheless, the nucleus contains most
(more than 99.9%) of the mass of an atom.
Does the nucleus have a structure, just as the atom does? If so, what
are the constituents of the nucleus? How are these held together? In this
chapter, we shall look for answers to such questions. We shall discuss
various properties of nuclei such as their size, mass and stability, and
also associated nuclear phenomena such as radioactivity, fission and fusion.
13.2 A TOMIC M ASSES AND C OMPOSITION OF N UCLEUS
438
The mass of an atom is very small, compared to a kilogram; for example,
the mass of a carbon atom, 12 C, is 1.992647 × 10 –26 kg. Kilogram is not
a very convenient unit to measure such small quantities. Therefore, aNuclei
different mass unit is used for expressing atomic masses. This unit is the
atomic mass unit (u), defined as 1/12 th of the mass of the carbon ( 12 C)
atom. According to this definition
1u =
=
mass of one
12
12
C atom
1.992647 × 10 − 26 kg
12
(13.1)
= 1.660539 × 10 − 27 kg
The atomic masses of various elements expressed in atomic mass
unit (u) are close to being integral multiples of the mass of a hydrogen
atom. There are, however, many striking exceptions to this rule. For
example, the atomic mass of chlorine atom is 35.46 u.
Accurate measurement of atomic masses is carried out with a mass
spectrometer, The measurement of atomic masses reveals the existence
of different types of atoms of the same element, which exhibit the same
chemical properties, but differ in mass. Such atomic species of the same
element differing in mass are called isotopes. (In Greek, isotope means
the same place, i.e. they occur in the same place in the periodic table of
elements.) It was found that practically every element consists of a mixture
of several isotopes. The relative abundance of different isotopes differs
from element to element. Chlorine, for example, has two isotopes having
masses 34.98 u and 36.98 u, which are nearly integral multiples of the
mass of a hydrogen atom. The relative abundances of these isotopes are
75.4 and 24.6 per cent, respectively. Thus, the average mass of a chlorine
atom is obtained by the weighted average of the masses of the two
isotopes, which works out to be
75.4 × 34.98 + 24.6 × 36.98
100
= 35.47 u
which agrees with the atomic mass of chlorine.
Even the lightest element, hydrogen has three isotopes having masses
1.0078 u, 2.0141 u, and 3.0160 u. The nucleus of the lightest atom of
hydrogen, which has a relative abundance of 99.985%, is called the
proton. The mass of a proton is
=
m p = 1.00727 u = 1.67262 × 10 − 27 kg
(13.2)
This is equal to the mass of the hydrogen atom (= 1.00783u), minus
the mass of a single electron (m e = 0.00055 u). The other two isotopes of
hydrogen are called deuterium and tritium. Tritium nuclei, being
unstable, do not occur naturally and are produced artificially in
laboratories.
The positive charge in the nucleus is that of the protons. A proton
carries one unit of fundamental charge and is stable. It was earlier thought
that the nucleus may contain electrons, but this was ruled out later using
arguments based on quantum theory. All the electrons of an atom are
outside the nucleus. We know that the number of these electrons outside
the nucleus of the atom is Z, the atomic number. The total charge of the
439Physics
atomic electrons is thus (–Ze), and since the atom is neutral, the charge
of the nucleus is (+Ze). The number of protons in the nucleus of the atom
is, therefore, exactly Z, the atomic number.
Discovery of Neutron
Since the nuclei of deuterium and tritium are isotopes of hydrogen, they
must contain only one proton each. But the masses of the nuclei of
hydrogen, deuterium and tritium are in the ratio of 1:2:3. Therefore, the
nuclei of deuterium and tritium must contain, in addition to a proton,
some neutral matter. The amount of neutral matter present in the nuclei
of these isotopes, expressed in units of mass of a proton, is approximately
equal to one and two, respectively. This fact indicates that the nuclei of
atoms contain, in addition to protons, neutral matter in multiples of a
basic unit. This hypothesis was verified in 1932 by James Chadwick
who observed emission of neutral radiation when beryllium nuclei were
bombarded with alpha-particles. ( α -particles are helium nuclei, to be
discussed in a later section). It was found that this neutral radiation
could knock out protons from light nuclei such as those of helium, carbon
and nitrogen. The only neutral radiation known at that time was photons
(electromagnetic radiation). Application of the principles of conservation
of energy and momentum showed that if the neutral radiation consisted
of photons, the energy of photons would have to be much higher than is
available from the bombardment of beryllium nuclei with α -particles.
The clue to this puzzle, which Chadwick satisfactorily solved, was to
assume that the neutral radiation consists of a new type of neutral
particles called neutrons. From conservation of energy and momentum,
he was able to determine the mass of new particle ‘as very nearly the
same as mass of proton’.
The mass of a neutron is now known to a high degree of accuracy. It is
m n = 1.00866 u = 1.6749×10 –27 kg
(13.3)
Chadwick was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his
discovery of the neutron.
A free neutron, unlike a free proton, is unstable. It decays into a
proton, an electron and a antineutrino (another elementary particle), and
has a mean life of about 1000s. It is, however, stable inside the nucleus.
The composition of a nucleus can now be described using the following
terms and symbols:
Z - atomic number = number of protons [13.4(a)]
N - neutron number = number of neutrons [13.4(b)]
A - mass number = Z + N
440
= total number of protons and neutrons [13.4(c)]
One also uses the term nucleon for a proton or a neutron. Thus the
number of nucleons in an atom is its mass number A.
Nuclear species or nuclides are shown by the notation Z A X where X is
the chemical symbol of the species. For example, the nucleus of gold is
denoted by 197
. It contains 197 nucleons, of which 79 are protons
79 Au
and the rest118 are neutrons.Nuclei
The composition of isotopes of an element can now be readily
explained. The nuclei of isotopes of a given element contain the same
number of protons, but differ from each other in their number of neutrons.
Deuterium, 1 2 H , which is an isotope of hydrogen, contains one proton
and one neutron. Its other isotope tritium, 1 3 H , contains one proton and
two neutrons. The element gold has 32 isotopes, ranging from A =173 to
A = 204. We have already mentioned that chemical properties of elements
depend on their electronic structure. As the atoms of isotopes have
identical electronic structure they have identical chemical behaviour and
are placed in the same location in the periodic table.
All nuclides with same mass number A are called isobars. For
example, the nuclides 1 3 H and 32 He are isobars. Nuclides with same
neutron number N but different atomic number Z, for example 198
80 Hg
and 197
,
are
called
isotones.
Au
79
13.3 S IZE
OF THE
N UCLEUS
As we have seen in Chapter 12, Rutherford was the pioneer who
postulated and established the existence of the atomic nucleus. At
Rutherford’s suggestion, Geiger and Marsden performed their classic
experiment: on the scattering of α -particles from thin gold foils. Their
experiments revealed that the distance of closest approach to a gold
nucleus of an α -particle of kinetic energy 5.5 MeV is about 4.0 × 10 –14 m.
The scattering of α -particle by the gold sheet could be understood by
Rutherford by assuming that the coulomb repulsive force was solely
responsible for scattering. Since the positive charge is confined to the
nucleus, the actual size of the nucleus has to be less than 4.0 × 10 –14 m.
If we use α -particles of higher energies than 5.5 MeV, the distance of
closest approach to the gold nucleus will be smaller and at some point
the scattering will begin to be affected by the short range nuclear forces,
and differ from Rutherford’s calculations. Rutherford’s calculations are
based on pure coulomb repulsion between the positive charges of the α -
particle and the gold nucleus. From the distance at which deviations set
in, nuclear sizes can be inferred.
By performing scattering experiments in which fast electrons, instead
of α -particles, are projectiles that bombard targets made up of various
elements, the sizes of nuclei of various elements have been accurately
measured.
It has been found that a nucleus of mass number A has a radius
R = R 0 A 1/3
(13.5)
–15
where R 0 = 1.2 × 10 m. This means the volume of the nucleus, which
is proportional to R 3 is proportional to A. Thus the density of nucleus is
a constant, independent of A, for all nuclei. Different nuclei are likes
drop of liquid of constant density. The density of nuclear matter is
approximately 2.3 × 10 17 kg m –3 . This density is very large compared to
ordinary matter, say water, which is 10 3 kg m –3 . This is understandable,
as we have already seen that most of the atom is empty. Ordinary matter
consisting of atoms has a large amount of empty space.
441Physics
Example 13.1 Given the mass of iron nucleus as 55.85u and A=56,
find the nuclear density?
Solution
m Fe = 55.85,
u = 9.27 × 10 –26 kg
− 26
9.27 × 10
1
mass
×
=
(4 π /3)(1.2 × 10 − 15 ) 3 56
volume
= 2.29 × 10 17 kg m –3
The density of matter in neutron stars (an astrophysical object) is
comparable to this density. This shows that matter in these objects
has been compressed to such an extent that they resemble a big nucleus.
Nuclear density =
13.4 M ASS -E NERGY
AND
N UCLEAR B INDING E NERGY
13.4.1 Mass – Energy
Einstein showed from his theory of special relativity that it is necessary
to treat mass as another form of energy. Before the advent of this theory
of special relativity it was presumed that mass and energy were conserved
separately in a reaction. However, Einstein showed that mass is another
form of energy and one can convert mass-energy into other forms of
energy, say kinetic energy and vice-versa.
Einstein gave the famous mass-energy equivalence relation
E = mc 2
(13.6)
Here the energy equivalent of mass m is related by the above equation
and c is the velocity of light in vacuum and is approximately equal to
3×10 8 m s –1 .
Example 13.2 Calculate the energy equivalent of 1 g of substance.
Solution
Energy, E = 10 –3 × ( 3 × 10 8 ) 2 J
E = 10 –3 × 9 × 10 16 = 9 × 10 13 J
Thus, if one gram of matter is converted to energy, there is a release
of enormous amount of energy.
Experimental verification of the Einstein’s mass-energy relation has
been achieved in the study of nuclear reactions amongst nucleons, nuclei,
electrons and other more recently discovered particles. In a reaction the
conservation law of energy states that the initial energy and the final
energy are equal provided the energy associated with mass is also
included. This concept is important in understanding nuclear masses
and the interaction of nuclei with one another. They form the subject
matter of the next few sections.
13.4.2 Nuclear binding energy
442
In Section 13.2 we have seen that the nucleus is made up of neutrons
and protons. Therefore it may be expected that the mass of the nucleus
is equal to the total mass of its individual protons and neutrons. However,Nuclei
the nuclear mass M is found to be always less than this. For example, let
us consider 168 O ; a nucleus which has 8 neutrons and 8 protons. We
have
Mass of 8 neutrons = 8 × 1.00866 u
Mass of 8 protons = 8 × 1.00727 u
Mass of 8 electrons = 8 × 0.00055 u
Therefore the expected mass of 168 O nucleus
= 8 × 2.01593 u = 16.12744 u.
The atomic mass of 168 O found from mass spectroscopy experiments
is seen to be 15.99493 u. Substracting the mass of 8 electrons (8 × 0.00055 u)
from this, we get the experimental mass of 168 O nucleus to be 15.99053 u.
Thus, we find that the mass of the 168 O nucleus is less than the total
mass of its constituents by 0.13691u. The difference in mass of a nucleus
and its constituents, ∆ M, is called the mass defect, and is given by
∆ M = [ Zm p + ( A − Z ) m n ] − M
(13.7)
What is the meaning of the mass defect? It is here that Einstein’s
equivalence of mass and energy plays a role. Since the mass of the oxygen
nucleus is less that the sum of the masses of its constituents (8 protons
and 8 neutrons, in the unbound state), the equivalent energy of the oxygen
nucleus is less than that of the sum of the equivalent energies of its
constituents. If one wants to break the oxygen nucleus into 8 protons
and 8 neutrons, this extra energy ∆ M c 2 , has to supplied. This energy
required E b is related to the mass defect by
E b = ∆ M c 2
(13.8)
Example 13.3 Find the energy equivalent of one atomic mass unit,
first in Joules and then in MeV. Using this, express the mass defect
of 168 O in MeV/c 2 .
Solution
1u = 1.6605 × 10 –27 kg
To convert it into energy units, we multiply it by c 2 and find that
energy equivalent = 1.6605 × 10 –27 × (2.9979 × 10 8 ) 2 kg m 2 /s 2
= 1.4924 × 10 –10 J
=
1.4924 × 10 − 10
eV
1.602 × 10 − 19
The energy needed to separate
16
8
O into its constituents is thus
2
127.5 MeV/c .
If a certain number of neutrons and protons are brought together to
form a nucleus of a certain charge and mass, an energy E b will be released
= 0.9315 × 10 9 eV
= 931.5 MeV
or, 1u = 931.5 MeV/c 2
For 168 O , ∆M = 0.13691 u = 0.13691×931.5 MeV/c 2
= 127.5 MeV/c 2
443Physics
in the process. The energy E b is called the binding energy of the nucleus.
If we separate a nucleus into its nucleons, we would have to supply a
total energy equal to E b , to those particles. Although we cannot tear
apart a nucleus in this way, the nuclear binding energy is still a convenient
measure of how well a nucleus is held together. A more useful measure
of the binding between the constituents of the nucleus is the binding
energy per nucleon, E bn , which is the ratio of the binding energy E b of a
nucleus to the number of the nucleons, A, in that nucleus:
E bn = E b / A
(13.9)
We can think of binding energy per nucleon as the average energy
per nucleon needed to separate a nucleus into its individual nucleons.
Figure 13.1 is a plot of the
binding energy per nucleon E bn
versus the mass number A for a
large number of nuclei. We notice
the following main features of
the plot:
(i) the binding energy per
nucleon, E bn , is practically
constant, i.e. practically
independent of the atomic
number for nuclei of middle
mass number ( 30 < A < 170).
The curve has a maximum of
about 8.75 MeV for A = 56
and has a value of 7.6 MeV
FIGURE 13.1 The binding energy per nucleon
for A = 238.
as a function of mass number.
(ii) E bn is lower for both light
nuclei (A<30) and heavy
nuclei (A>170).
We can draw some conclusions from these two observations:
(i) The force is attractive and sufficiently strong to produce a binding
energy of a few MeV per nucleon.
(ii) The constancy of the binding energy in the range 30 < A < 170 is a
consequence of the fact that the nuclear force is short-ranged. Consider
a particular nucleon inside a sufficiently large nucleus. It will be under
the influence of only some of its neighbours, which come within the
range of the nuclear force. If any other nucleon is at a distance more
than the range of the nuclear force from the particular nucleon it will
have no influence on the binding energy of the nucleon under
consideration. If a nucleon can have a maximum of p neighbours
within the range of nuclear force, its binding energy would be
proportional to p. Let the binding energy of the nucleus be pk, where
k is a constant having the dimensions of energy. If we increase A by
adding nucleons they will not change the binding energy of a nucleon
inside. Since most of the nucleons in a large nucleus reside inside it
and not on the surface, the change in binding energy per nucleon
would be small. The binding energy per nucleon is a constant and is
444
approximately equal to pk. The property that a given nucleonNuclei
influences only nucleons close to it is also referred to as saturation
property of the nuclear force.
(iii) A very heavy nucleus, say A = 240, has lower binding energy per
nucleon compared to that of a nucleus with A = 120. Thus if a
nucleus A = 240 breaks into two A = 120 nuclei, nucleons get more
tightly bound. This implies energy would be released in the process.
It has very important implications for energy production through
fission, to be discussed later in Section 13.7.1.
(iv) Consider two very light nuclei (A ≤ 10) joining to form a heavier
nucleus. The binding energy per nucleon of the fused heavier nuclei
is more than the binding energy per nucleon of the lighter nuclei.
This means that the final system is more tightly bound than the initial
system. Again energy would be released in such a process of
fusion. This is the energy source of sun, to be discussed later in
Section 13.7.3.
13.5 N UCLEAR F ORCE
The force that determines the motion of atomic electrons is the familiar
Coulomb force. In Section 13.4, we have seen that for average mass
nuclei the binding energy per nucleon is approximately 8 MeV, which is
much larger than the binding energy in atoms. Therefore, to bind a
nucleus together there must be a strong attractive force of a totally
different kind. It must be strong enough to overcome the repulsion
between the (positively charged) protons and to bind both protons and
neutrons into the tiny nuclear volume. We have already seen
that the constancy of binding energy per nucleon can be
understood in terms of its short-range. Many features of the
nuclear binding force are summarised below. These are
obtained from a variety of experiments carried out during 1930
to 1950.
(i) The nuclear force is much stronger than the Coulomb force
acting between charges or the gravitational forces between
masses. The nuclear binding force has to dominate over
the Coulomb repulsive force between protons inside the
nucleus. This happens only because the nuclear force is
much stronger than the coulomb force. The gravitational
force is much weaker than even Coulomb force.
FIGURE 13.2 Potential energy
(ii) The nuclear force between two nucleons falls rapidly to
of a pair of nucleons as a
zero as their distance is more than a few femtometres. This
function of their separation.
leads to saturation of forces in a medium or a large-sized
For a separation greater
nucleus, which is the reason for the constancy of the
than r 0 , the force is attractive
binding energy per nucleon.
and for separations less
than r 0 , the force is
A rough plot of the potential energy between two nucleons
strongly repulsive.
as a function of distance is shown in the Fig. 13.2. The
potential energy is a minimum at a distance r 0 of about
0.8 fm. This means that the force is attractive for distances larger
than 0.8 fm and repulsive if they are separated by distances less
445
than 0.8 fm.Physics
(iii) The nuclear force between neutron-neutron, proton-neutron and
proton-proton is approximately the same. The nuclear force does not
depend on the electric charge.
Unlike Coulomb’s law or the Newton’s law of gravitation there is no
simple mathematical form of the nuclear force.
13.6 R ADIOACTIVITY
A. H. Becquerel discovered radioactivity in 1896 purely by accident. While
studying the fluorescence and phosphorescence of compounds irradiated
with visible light, Becquerel observed an interesting phenomenon. After
illuminating some pieces of uranium-potassium sulphate with visible
light, he wrapped them in black paper and separated the package from a
photographic plate by a piece of silver. When, after several hours of
exposure, the photographic plate was developed, it showed blackening
due to something that must have been emitted by the compound and
was able to penetrate both black paper and the silver.
Experiments performed subsequently showed that radioactivity was
a nuclear phenomenon in which an unstable nucleus undergoes a decay.
This is referred to as radioactive decay. Three types of radioactive decay
occur in nature :
(i) α -decay in which a helium nucleus 42 He is emitted;
(ii) β -decay in which electrons or positrons (particles with the same mass
as electrons, but with a charge exactly opposite to that of electron)
are emitted;
(iii) γ -decay in which high energy (hundreds of keV or more) photons are
emitted.
Each of these decay will be considered in subsequent sub-sections.
13.6.1 Law of radioactive decay
In any radioactive sample, which undergoes α , β or γ -decay, it is found
that the number of nuclei undergoing the decay per unit time is
proportional to the total number of nuclei in the sample. If N is the
number of nuclei in the sample and ∆ N undergo decay in time ∆ t then
∆ N
∝ N
∆ t
or, ∆ N/ ∆ t = λ N,
(13.10)
where λ is called the radioactive decay constant or disintegration constant.
The change in the number of nuclei in the sample* is dN = – ∆ N in
time ∆ t. Thus the rate of change of N is (in the limit ∆ t → 0)
d N
= – λ N
d t
446
* ∆N is the number of nuclei that decay, and hence is always positive. dN is the
change in N, which may have either sign. Here it is negative, because out of
original N nuclei, ∆N have decayed, leaving (N–∆N ) nuclei.Nuclei
dN
= –λdt
N
Now, integrating both sides of the above equation,we get,
or,
(13.11)
or, ln N − ln N 0 = −λ (t – t 0 )
(13.12)
Here N 0 is the number of radioactive nuclei in the sample at some
arbitrary time t 0 and N is the number of radioactive nuclei at any
subsequent time t. Setting t 0 = 0 and rearranging Eq. (13.12) gives us
ln
N
= − λ t
N 0
(13.13)
which gives
N(t) = N 0 e −λ t
(13.14)
Note, for example, the light bulbs follow no such exponential decay law.
If we test 1000 bulbs for their life (time span before they burn out or
fuse), we expect that they will ‘decay’ (that is, burn out) at more or less
the same time. The decay of radionuclides follows quite a different law,
the law of radioactive decay represented by Eq. (13.14).
The total decay rate R of a sample is the number of nuclei
disintegrating per unit time. Suppose in a time interval dt, the decay
count measured is ∆N. Then dN = – ∆N.
The positive quantity R is then defined as
R = –
d N
d t
Differentiating Eq. (13.14), we get
R = λN 0 e −λ t
or, R = R 0 e – λ t
(13.15)
This is equivalant to the law of radioactivity decay,
since you can integrate Eq. (13.15) to get back Eq.
(13.14). Clearly, R 0 = λN 0 is the decay rate at t = 0. The
decay rate R at a certain time t and the number of
undecayed nuclei N at the same time are related by
R = λN
(13.16)
FIGURE 13.3 Exponential decay of a
radioactive species. After a lapse of
T 1/2 , population of the given species
drops by a factor of 2.
The decay rate of a sample, rather than the number of radioactive
nuclei, is a more direct experimentally measurable quantity and is given
a specific name: activity. The SI unit for activity is becquerel, named
after the discoverer of radioactivity, Henry Becquerel.
447Physics
1 becquerel is simply equal to 1 disintegration or decay per second.
There is also another unit named “curie” that is widely used and is related
to the SI unit as:
1 curie = 1 Ci = 3.7 × 10 10 decays per second
= 3.7 × 10 10 Bq
Different radionuclides differ greatly in their rate of
decay. A common way to characterize this feature is
through the notion of half-life. Half-life of a radionuclide
(denoted by T 1/2 ) is the time it takes for a sample that has
initially, say N 0 radionuclei to reduce to N 0 /2. Putting
N = N 0 /2 and t = T 1/2 in Eq. (13.14), we get
T 1/2 =
Marie Sklodowska Curie
(1867-1934) Born in
Poland. She is recognised
both as a physicist and as
a chemist. The discovery of
radioactivity by Henri
Becquerel in 1896 inspired
Marie and her husband
Pierre Curie in their
researches and analyses
which led to the isolation of
radium and polonium
elements. She was the first
person to be awarded two
Nobel Prizes- for Physics in
1903 and for Chemistry
in 1911.
ln 2
=
0.693
(13.17)
λ
λ
Clearly if N 0 reduces to half its value in time T 1/2 , R 0
will also reduce to half its value in the same time according
to Eq. (13.16).
Another related measure is the average or mean life
τ . This again can be obtained from Eq. (13.14). The
number of nuclei which decay in the time interval t to t +
∆t is R(t)∆t (= λN 0 e –λt ∆t). Each of them has lived for time
t. Thus the total life of all these nuclei would be t λN 0 e –λt
∆t. It is clear that some nuclei may live for a short time
while others may live longer. Therefore to obtain the mean
life, we have to sum (or integrate) this expression over all
times from 0 to ∞ , and divide by the total number N 0 of
nuclei at t = 0. Thus,
∞
τ =
λ N 0 ∫ te – λ t d t
0
∞
= λ ∫ te – λ t d t
N 0
0
One can show by performing this integral that
τ = 1/ λ
We summarise these results with the following:
T 1/2 =
ln 2
λ
= τ ln 2
(13.18)
448
Radioactive elements (e.g., tritium, plutonium) which are short-lived
i.e., have half-lives much less than the age of the universe ( 15 billion
years) have obviously decayed long ago and are not found in nature.
They can, however, be produced artificially in nuclear reactions.
Example 13.4 The half-life of 238
undergoing α -decay is 4.5 × 10 9
92 U
years. What is the activity of 1g sample of 238
?
92 U
Solution
T 1/2 = 4.5 × 10 9 y
= 4.5 × 10 9 y x 3.16 x 10 7 s/y
= 1.42 × 10 17 sNuclei
One k mol of any isotope contains Avogadro’s number of atoms, and
so 1g of 238
contains
92 U
=
1
kmol × 6.025 × 10 26 atoms/kmol
238 × 10 –3
= 25.3 × 10 20 atoms.
The decay rate R is
R = λ N
0.693
0.693 × 25.3 × 10 20 − 1
N =
s
T 1/ 2
1.42 × 10 17
= 1.23 × 10 4 s –1
= 1.23 × 10 4 Bq
Solution
By definition of half-life, half of the initial sample will remain
undecayed after 12.5 y. In the next 12.5 y, one-half of these nuclei
would have decayed. Hence, one fourth of the sample of the initial
pure tritium will remain undecayed.
Example 13.5 Tritium has a half-life of 12.5 y undergoing beta decay.
What fraction of a sample of pure tritium will remain undecayed
after 25 y.
13.6.2 Alpha decay
A well-known example of alpha decay is the decay of uranium
thorium 234
with the emission of a helium nucleus 2 4 He
90 Th
238
92
U →
234
90
Th + 2 4 He
(α-decay)
238
92
U to
(13.19)
In α-decay, the mass number of the product nucleus (daughter
nucleus) is four less than that of the decaying nucleus (parent nucleus),
while the atomic number decreases by two. In general, α-decay of a parent
nucleus Z A X results in a daughter nucleus A Z −− 4 2 Y
(13.20)
X → A Z −− 4 2 Y + 2 4 He
From Einstein’s mass-energy equivalance relation [Eq. (13.6)] and
energy conservation, it is clear that this spontaneous decay is possible
only when the total mass of the decay products is less than the mass of
the initial nucleus. This difference in mass appears as kinetic energy of
the products. By referring to a table of nuclear masses, one can check
that the total mass of 234
and 2 4 He is indeed less than that of 238
.
90 Th
92 U
The disintegration energy or the Q-value of a nuclear reaction is the
difference between the initial mass energy and the total mass energy of
the decay products. For α-decay
A
Z
Q = (m X – m Y – m He ) c 2
(13.21)
Q is also the net kinetic energy gained in the process or, if the initial
nucleus X is at rest, the kinetic energy of the products. Clearly, Q> 0 for
exothermic processes such as α-decay.
449Physics
Example 13.6 We are given the following atomic masses:
238
4
= 238.05079 u
= 4.00260 u
92 U
2 He
234
1
= 234.04363 u 1 H = 1.00783 u
90 Th
237
91
Pa = 237.05121 u
Here the symbol Pa is for the element protactinium (Z = 91).
(a) Calculate the energy released during the alpha decay of 238
92 U .
(b) Show that 238
can
not
spontaneously
emit
a
proton.
U
92
Solution
(a) The alpha decay of 238
92 U is given by Eq. (13.20). The energy released
in this process is given by
Q = (M U – M Th – M He ) c 2
Substituting the atomic masses as given in the data, we find
Q = (238.05079 – 234.04363 – 4.00260)u × c 2
= (0.00456 u) c 2
= (0.00456 u) (931.5 MeV/u)
= 4.25 MeV.
(b) If 238
spontaneously emits a proton, the decay process would be
92 U
+ 11 H
U → 237
91 Pa
The Q for this process to happen is
= (M U – M Pa – M H ) c 2
= (238.05079 – 237.05121 – 1.00783) u × c 2
= (– 0.00825 u) c 2
= – (0.00825 u)(931.5 MeV/u)
= – 7.68 MeV
Thus, the Q of the process is negative and therefore it cannot proceed
spontaneously. We will have to supply an energy of 7.68 MeV to a
238
nucleus to make it emit a proton.
92 U
238
92
13.6.3 Beta decay
In beta decay, a nucleus spontaneously emits an electron ( β − decay) or a
positron ( β + decay). A common example of β − decay is
32
15
32
P → 16
S + e − + ν
(13.22)
and that of β + decay is
22
11
450
22
Na → 10
Ne + e + + ν
(13.23)
The decays are governed by the Eqs. (13.14) and (13.15), so that one
can never predict which nucleus will undergo decay, but one can
characterize the decay by a half-life T 1/2 . For example, T 1/2 for the decays
above is respectively 14.3 d and 2.6y. The emission of electron in β − decay
is accompanied by the emission of an antineutrino ( ν ); in β + decay, instead,
a neutrino (ν) is generated. Neutrinos are neutral particles with very small
(possiblly, even zero) mass compared to electrons. They have only weak
interaction with other particles. They are, therefore, very difficult to detect,
since they can penetrate large quantity of matter (even earth) without any
interaction.Nuclei
In both β − and β + decay, the mass number A remains unchanged. In
β decay, the atomic number Z of the nucleus goes up by 1, while in β +
decay Z goes down by 1. The basic nuclear process underlying β − decay
is the conversion of neutron to proton
−
n → p + e – + ν
(13.24)
+
while for β decay, it is the conversion of proton into neutron
p → n + e + + ν
(13.25)
Note that while a free neutron decays to proton, the decay of proton to
neutron [Eq. (13.25)] is possible only inside the nucleus, since proton
has smaller mass than neutron.
13.6.4 Gamma decay
Like an atom, a nucleus also has discrete energy levels - the ground
state and excited states. The scale of energy is, however, very different.
Atomic energy level spacings are of the order of eV, while the difference in
nuclear energy levels is of the order of MeV. When a
nucleus in an excited state spontaneously decays
to its ground state (or to a lower energy state), a
photon is emitted with energy equal to the difference
in the two energy levels of the nucleus. This is the
so-called gamma decay. The energy (MeV)
corresponds to radiation of extremely short
wavelength, shorter than the hard X-ray region.
Typically, a gamma ray is emitted when a α or β
decay results in a daughter nucleus in an excited
state. This then returns to the ground state by a
single photon transition or successive transitions
involving more than one photon. A familiar example
FIGURE 13.4 β-decay of 60
Ni nucleus
28
is the successive emmission of gamma rays of
followed by emission of two γ rays
energies 1.17 MeV and 1.33 MeV from the
from deexcitation of the daughter
deexcitation of 60
nuclei formed from β − decay
28 Ni
nucleus 60
Ni .
28
60
of 27 Co .
13.7 N UCLEAR E NERGY
The curve of binding energy per nucleon E bn , given in Fig. 13.1, has
a long flat middle region between A = 30 and A = 170. In this region
the binding energy per nucleon is nearly constant (8.0 MeV). For
the lighter nuclei region, A < 30, and for the heavier nuclei region,
A > 170, the binding energy per nucleon is less than 8.0 MeV, as we
have noted earlier. Now, the greater the binding energy, the less is the
total mass of a bound system, such as a nucleus. Consequently, if nuclei
with less total binding energy transform to nuclei with greater binding
energy, there will be a net energy release. This is what happens when a
heavy nucleus decays into two or more intermediate mass fragments
(fission) or when light nuclei fuse into a havier nucleus (fusion.)
Exothermic chemical reactions underlie conventional energy sources
such as coal or petroleum. Here the energies involved are in the range of
451Physics
electron volts. On the other hand, in a nuclear reaction, the energy release
is of the order of MeV. Thus for the same quantity of matter, nuclear
sources produce a million times more energy than a chemical source.
Fission of 1 kg of uranium, for example, generates 10 14 J of energy;
compare it with burning of 1 kg of coal that gives 10 7 J.
13.7.1 Fission
New possibilities emerge when we go beyond natural radioactive decays
and study nuclear reactions by bombarding nuclei with other nuclear
particles such as proton, neutron, α-particle, etc.
A most important neutron-induced nuclear reaction is fission. An
example of fission is when a uranium isotope
235
92
U bombarded with a
neutron breaks into two intermediate mass nuclear fragments
236
144
89
1
(13.26)
n + 235
92 U → 92 U → 56 Ba + 36 Kr + 3 0 n
The same reaction can produce other pairs of intermediate mass
fragments
1
0
236
133
n + 235
92 U → 92 U → 51 Sb +
Or, as another example,
1
0
1
0
140
n + 235
92 U → 54 Xe +
94
38
99
41
Nb + 4 1 0 n
Sr + 2 1 0 n
(13.27)
(13.28)
The fragment products are radioactive nuclei; they emit β particles in
succession to achieve stable end products.
The energy released (the Q value ) in the fission reaction of nuclei like
uranium is of the order of 200 MeV per fissioning nucleus. This is
estimated as follows:
Let us take a nucleus with A = 240 breaking into two fragments each
of A = 120. Then
E bn for A = 240 nucleus is about 7.6 MeV,
E bn for the two A = 120 fragment nuclei is about 8.5 MeV.
∴ Gain in binding energy for nucleon is about 0.9 MeV.
Hence the total gain in binding energy is 240×0.9 or 216 MeV.
The disintegration energy in fission events first appears as the kinetic
energy of the fragments and neutrons. Eventually it is transferred to the
surrounding matter appearing as heat. The source of energy in nuclear
reactors, which produce electricity, is nuclear fission. The enormous
energy released in an atom bomb comes from uncontrolled nuclear fission.
We discuss some details in the next section how a nuclear reactor
functions.
13.7.2 Nuclear reactor
452
Notice one fact of great importance in the fission reactions given in Eqs.
(13.26) to (13.28). There is a release of extra neutron (s) in the fission
process. Averagely, 21⁄2 neutrons are released per fission of uranium
nucleus. It is a fraction since in some fission events 2 neutrons areNuclei
I NDIA ’ S ATOMIC
ENERGY PROGRAMME
The atomic energy programme in India was launched around the time of independence
under the leadership of Homi J. Bhabha (1909-1966). An early historic achievement
was the design and construction of the first nuclear reactor in India (named Apsara)
which went critical on August 4, 1956. It used enriched uranium as fuel and water as
moderator. Following this was another notable landmark: the construction of CIRUS
(Canada India Research U.S.) reactor in 1960. This 40 MW reactor used natural uranium
as fuel and heavy water as moderator. Apsara and CIRUS spurred research in a wide
range of areas of basic and applied nuclear science. An important milestone in the first
two decades of the programme was the indigenous design and construction of the
plutonium plant at Trombay, which ushered in the technology of fuel reprocessing
(separating useful fissile and fertile nuclear materials from the spent fuel of a reactor) in
India. Research reactors that have been subsequently commissioned include ZERLINA,
PURNIMA (I, II and III), DHRUVA and KAMINI. KAMINI is the country’s first large research
reactor that uses U-233 as fuel. As the name suggests, the primary objective of a research
reactor is not generation of power but to provide a facility for research on different aspects
of nuclear science and technology. Research reactors are also an excellent source for
production of a variety of radioactive isotopes that find application in diverse fields:
industry, medicine and agriculture.
The main objectives of the Indian Atomic Energy programme are to provide safe and
reliable electric power for the country’s social and economic progress and to be self-
reliant in all aspects of nuclear technology. Exploration of atomic minerals in India
undertaken since the early fifties has indicated that India has limited reserves of uranium,
but fairly abundant reserves of thorium. Accordingly, our country has adopted a three-
stage strategy of nuclear power generation. The first stage involves the use of natural
uranium as a fuel, with heavy water as moderator. The Plutonium-239 obtained from
reprocessing of the discharged fuel from the reactors then serves as a fuel for the second
stage — the fast breeder reactors. They are so called because they use fast neutrons for
sustaining the chain reaction (hence no moderator is needed) and, besides generating
power, also breed more fissile species (plutonium) than they consume. The third stage,
most significant in the long term, involves using fast breeder reactors to produce fissile
Uranium-233 from Thorium-232 and to build power reactors based on them.
India is currently well into the second stage of the programme and considerable
work has also been done on the third — the thorium utilisation — stage. The country
has mastered the complex technologies of mineral exploration and mining, fuel
fabrication, heavy water production, reactor design, construction and operation, fuel
reprocessing, etc. Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs) built at different sites in
the country mark the accomplishment of the first stage of the programme. India is now
more than self-sufficient in heavy water production. Elaborate safety measures both in
the design and operation of reactors, as also adhering to stringent standards of
radiological protection are the hallmark of the Indian Atomic Energy Programme.
produced, in some 3, etc. The extra neutrons in turn can initiate fission
processes, producing still more neutrons, and so on. This leads to the
possibility of a chain reaction, as was first suggested by Enrico Fermi. If
the chain reaction is controlled suitably, we can get a steady energy
453Physics
output. This is what happens in a nuclear reactor. If the chain reaction is
uncontrolled, it leads to explosive energy output, as in a nuclear bomb.
There is, however, a hurdle in sustaining a chain reaction, as described
here. It is known experimentally that slow neutrons (thermal neutrons)
than fast neutrons. Also
are much more likely to cause fission in 235
92 U
fast neutrons liberated in fission would escape instead of causing another
fission reaction.
The average energy of a neutron produced in fission of 235
is 2 MeV.
92 U
These neutrons unless slowed down will escape from the reactor without
interacting with the uranium nuclei, unless a very large amount of
fissionable material is used for sustaining the chain reaction. What one
needs to do is to slow down the fast neutrons by elastic scattering with
light nuclei. In fact, Chadwick’s experiments showed that in an elastic
collision with hydrogen the neutron almost comes to rest and proton
carries away the energy. This is the same situation as when a marble hits
head-on an identical marble at rest. Therefore, in reactors, light nuclei
called moderators are provided along with the fissionable nuclei for slowing
down fast neutrons. The moderators commonly used are water, heavy
water (D 2 O) and graphite. The Apsara reactor at the Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai, uses water as moderator. The other
Indian reactors, which are used for power production, use heavy water
as moderator.
Because of the use of moderator, it is possible that the ratio, K, of
number of fission produced by a given generation of neutrons to the
number of fission of the preceeding generation may be greater than one.
This ratio is called the multiplication factor; it is the measure of the growth
rate of the neutrons in the reactor. For K = 1, the operation of the reactor
is said to be critical, which is what we wish it to be for steady power
operation. If K becomes greater than one, the reaction rate and the reactor
power increases exponentially. Unless the factor K is brought down very
close to unity, the reactor will become supercritical and can even explode.
The explosion of the Chernobyl reactor in Ukraine in 1986 is a sad
reminder that accidents in a nuclear reactor can be catastrophic.
The reaction rate is controlled through control-rods made out of
neutron-absorbing material such as cadmium. In addition to control rods,
reactors are provided with safety rods which, when required, can be
inserted into the reactor and K can be reduced rapidly to less than unity.
The more abundant isotope 238
in naturally occurring uranium is
92 U
non-fissionable. When it captures a neutron, it produces the highly
radioactive plutonium through these reactions
238
92 239
–
U + n → 239
92 U → 93 Np + e + ν
239
93 –
Np → 239
94 Pu +e + ν
(13.29)
Plutonium undergoes fission with slow neutrons.
454
Figure 13.5 shows the schematic diagram of a nuclear reactor based
on thermal neutron fission. The core of the reactor is the site of nuclearNuclei
re
fission. It contains the fuel elements in suitably fabricated form. The fuel
may be say enriched uranium (i.e., one that has greater abundance of
235
than naturally occurring uranium). The core contains a moderator
92 U
to slow down the neutrons. The core is surrounded by a reflector to reduce
leakage. The energy (heat) released in fission is continuously removed by
a suitable coolant. A containment vessel prevents the escape of radioactive
fission products. The whole assembly is shielded to check harmful
radiation from coming out. The reactor can be shut down by means of
rods (made of, for example, cadmium) that have high absorption of
neutrons. The coolant transfers heat to a working fluid which in turn
may produce stream. The steam drives turbines and generates electricity.
Like any power reactor, nuclear reactors generate considerable waste
products. But nuclear wastes need special care for treatment since they
are radioactive and hazardous. Elaborate safety measures, both for reactor
operation as well as handling and reprocessing the spent fuel, are
required. These safety measures are a distinguishing feature of the Indian
Atomic Energy programme. An appropriate plan is being evolved to study
the possibility of converting radioactive waste into less active and short-
lived material.
uk
FIGURE 13.5 Schematic diagram of a nuclear reactor based on
thermal neutron fission.
13.7.3 Nuclear fusion – energy generation in stars
When two light nuclei fuse to form a larger nucleus, energy is released,
since the larger nucleus is more tightly bound, as seen from the binding
energy curve in Fig.13.1. Some examples of such energy liberating nuclear
fusion reactions are :
+
H + 1 1 H → 2 1 H + e + ν + 0.42 MeV [13.29(a)]
2
1 H + 2 1 H → 2 3 He + n + 3.27 MeV [13.29(b)]
2
1 H + 2 1 H → 3 1 H + 1 1 H + 4.03 MeV [13.29(c)]
1
1
455Physics
In the first reaction, two protons combine to form a deuteron and
a positron with a release of 0.42 MeV energy. In reaction [13.29(b)], two
deuterons combine to form the light isotope of helium. In reaction
(13.29c), two deuterons combine to form a triton and a proton. For
fusion to take place, the two nuclei must come close enough so that
attractive short-range nuclear force is able to affect them. However,
since they are both positively charged particles, they experience coulomb
repulsion. They, therefore, must have enough energy to overcome this
coulomb barrier. The height of the barrier depends on the charges and
radii of the two interacting nuclei. It can be shown, for example, that
the barrier height for two protons is ~ 400 keV, and is higher for nuclei
with higher charges. We can estimate the temperature at which two
protons in a proton gas would (averagely) have enough energy to
overcome the coulomb barrier:
400 keV, which gives T ~ 3 × 10 9 K.
(3/2)k T = K
When fusion is achieved by raising the temperature of the system so
that particles have enough kinetic energy to overcome the coulomb
repulsive behaviour, it is called thermonuclear fusion.
Thermonuclear fusion is the source of energy output in the interior
of stars. The interior of the sun has a temperature of 1.5×10 7 K, which
is considerably less than the estimated temperature required for fusion
of particles of average energy. Clearly, fusion in the sun involves protons
whose energies are much above the average energy.
The fusion reaction in the sun is a multi-step process in which the
hydrogen is burned into helium. Thus, the fuel in the sun is the hydrogen
in its core. The proton-proton (p, p) cycle by which this occurs is
represented by the following sets of reactions:
1
1
+
H + 1 1 H → 2 1 H + e + ν + 0.42 MeV
e + + e – → γ + γ + 1.02 MeV
(i)
(ii)
2
1 H + 1 1 H → 2 3 He + γ + 5.49 MeV
3
2 He + 3 2 He → 4 2 He + 1 1 H + 1 1 H + 12.86 MeV (iv)
(iii)
(13.30)
For the fourth reaction to occur, the first three reactions must occur
twice, in which case two light helium nuclei unite to form ordinary helium
nucleus. If we consider the combination 2(i) + 2(ii) + 2(iii) +(iv), the net
effect is
4 1 1 H + 2 e − → 4 2 He + 2 ν + 6 γ + 26.7 MeV
or (4 1 1 H + 4 e − ) → ( 4 2 He + 2 e − ) + 2 ν + 6 γ + 26.7 MeV
Thus, four hydrogen atoms combine to form an
release of 26.7 MeV of energy.
456
(13.31)
4
2
He atom with a
Helium is not the only element that can be synthesized in the interior
of a star. As the hydrogen in the core gets depleted and becomes helium,
the core starts to cool. The star begins to collapse under its own gravityNuclei
which increases the temperature of the core. If this temperature increases
to about 10 8 K, fusion takes place again, this time of helium nuclei into
carbon. This kind of process can generate through fusion higher and
higher mass number elements. But elements more massive than those
near the peak of the binding energy curve in Fig. 13.1 cannot be so
produced.
The age of the sun is about 5×10 9 y and it is estimated that there is
enough hydrogen in the sun to keep it going for another 5 billion years.
After that, the hydrogen burning will stop and the sun will begin to cool
and will start to collapse under gravity, which will raise the core
temperature. The outer envelope of the sun will expand, turning it into
the so called red giant.
N UCLEAR
HOLOCAUST
In a single uranium fission about 0.9×235 MeV (≈200 MeV) of energy is liberated. If
each nucleus of about 50 kg of 235 U undergoes fission the amount of energy involved is
about 4 × 10 15 J. This energy is equivalent to about 20,000 tons of TNT, enough for a
superexplosion. Uncontrolled release of large nuclear energy is called an atomic explosion.
On August 6, 1945 an atomic device was used in warfare for the first time. The US
dropped an atom bomb on Hiroshima, Japan. The explosion was equivalent to 20,000
tons of TNT. Instantly the radioactive products devastated 10 sq km of the city which
had 3,43,000 inhabitants. Of this number 66,000 were killed and 69,000 were injured;
more than 67% of the city’s structures were destroyed.
High temperature conditions for fusion reactions can be created by exploding a fission
bomb. Super-explosions equivalent to 10 megatons of explosive power of TNT were tested
in 1954. Such bombs which involve fusion of isotopes of hydrogen, deuterium and tritium
are called hydrogen bombs. It is estimated that a nuclear arsenal sufficient to destroy
every form of life on this planet several times over is in position to be triggered by the
press of a button. Such a nuclear holocaust will not only destroy the life that exists now
but its radioactive fallout will make this planet unfit for life for all times. Scenarios based
on theoretical calculations predict a long nuclear winter, as the radioactive waste will
hang like a cloud in the earth’s atmosphere and will absorb the sun’s radiation.
13.7.4 Controlled thermonuclear fusion
The natural thermonuclear fusion process in a star is replicated in a
thermonuclear fusion device. In controlled fusion reactors, the aim is to
generate steady power by heating the nuclear fuel to a temperature in the
range of 10 8 K. At these temperatures, the fuel is a mixture of positive
ions and electrons (plasma). The challenge is to confine this plasma, since
no container can stand such a high temperature. Several countries
around the world including India are developing techniques in this
connection. If successful, fusion reactors will hopefully supply almost
unlimited power to humanity.
457Physics
Example 13.7 Answer the following questions:
(a) Are the equations of nuclear reactions (such as those given in
Section 13.7) ‘balanced’ in the sense a chemical equation (e.g.,
2H 2 + O 2 → 2 H 2 O) is? If not, in what sense are they balanced on
both sides?
(b) If both the number of protons and the number of neutrons are
conserved in each nuclear reaction, in what way is mass converted
into energy (or vice-versa) in a nuclear reaction?
(c) A general impression exists that mass-energy interconversion
takes place only in nuclear reaction and never in chemical
reaction. This is strictly speaking, incorrect. Explain.
Solution
(a) A chemical equation is balanced in the sense that the number of
atoms of each element is the same on both sides of the equation.
A chemical reaction merely alters the original combinations of
atoms. In a nuclear reaction, elements may be transmuted. Thus,
the number of atoms of each element is not necessarily conserved
in a nuclear reaction. However, the number of protons and the
number of neutrons are both separately conserved in a nuclear
reaction. [Actually, even this is not strictly true in the realm of
very high energies – what is strictly conserved is the total charge
and total ‘baryon number’. We need not pursue this matter here.]
In nuclear reactions (e.g., Eq. 13.26), the number of protons and
the number of neutrons are the same on the two sides of the equation.
458
(b) We know that the binding energy of a nucleus gives a negative
contribution to the mass of the nucleus (mass defect). Now, since
proton number and neutron number are conserved in a nuclear
reaction, the total rest mass of neutrons and protons is the same
on either side of a reaction. But the total binding energy of nuclei
on the left side need not be the same as that on the right hand
side. The difference in these binding energies appears as energy
released or absorbed in a nuclear reaction. Since binding energy
contributes to mass, we say that the difference in the total mass
of nuclei on the two sides get converted into energy or vice-versa.
It is in these sense that a nuclear reaction is an example of mass-
energy interconversion.
(c) From the point of view of mass-energy interconversion, a chemical
reaction is similar to a nuclear reaction in principle. The energy
released or absorbed in a chemical reaction can be traced to the
difference in chemical (not nuclear) binding energies of atoms and
molecules on the two sides of a reaction. Since, strictly speaking,
chemical binding energy also gives a negative contribution (mass
defect) to the total mass of an atom or molecule, we can equally
well say that the difference in the total mass of atoms or molecules,
on the two sides of the chemical reaction gets converted into energy
or vice-versa. However, the mass defects involved in a chemical
reaction are almost a million times smaller than those in a nuclear
reaction.This is the reason for the general impression, (which is
incorrect ) that mass-energy interconversion does not take place
in a chemical reaction.Nuclei
SUMMARY
1.
2.
3.
4.
An atom has a nucleus. The nucleus is positively charged. The radius
of the nucleus is smaller than the radius of an atom by a factor of
10 4 . More than 99.9% mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus.
On the atomic scale, mass is measured in atomic mass units (u). By
definition, 1 atomic mass unit (1u) is 1/12 th mass of one atom of 12 C;
1u = 1.660563 × 10 –27 kg.
A nucleus contains a neutral particle called neutron. Its mass is almost
the same as that of proton
The atomic number Z is the number of protons in the atomic nucleus
of an element. The mass number A is the total number of protons and
neutrons in the atomic nucleus; A = Z+N; Here N denotes the number
of neutrons in the nucleus.
A
A nuclear species or a nuclide is represented as Z X , where X is the
chemical symbol of the species.
Nuclides with the same atomic number Z, but different neutron number
N are called isotopes. Nuclides with the same A are isobars and those
with the same N are isotones.
Most elements are mixtures of two or more isotopes. The atomic mass
of an element is a weighted average of the masses of its isotopes. The
masses are the relative abundances of the isotopes.
5. A nucleus can be considered to be spherical in shape and assigned a
radius. Electron scattering experiments allow determination of the
nuclear radius; it is found that radii of nuclei fit the formula
R = R 0 A 1/3 ,
where R 0 = a constant = 1.2 fm. This implies that the nuclear density
is independent of A. It is of the order of 10 17 kg/m 3 .
6. Neutrons and protons are bound in a nucleus by the short-range strong
nuclear force. The nuclear force does not distinguish between neutron
and proton.
7. The nuclear mass M is always less than the total mass, Σm, of its
constituents. The difference in mass of a nucleus and its constituents
is called the mass defect,
∆M = (Z m p + ( A – Z )m n ) – M
Using Einstein’s mass energy relation, we express this mass difference
in terms of energy as
∆E b = ∆M c 2
The energy ∆E b represents the binding energy of the nucleus. In the
mass number range A = 30 to 170, the binding energy per nucleon is
nearly constant, about 8 MeV/nucleon.
8. Energies associated with nuclear processes are about a million times
larger than chemical process.
9. The Q-value of a nuclear process is
Q = final kinetic energy – initial kinetic energy.
Due to conservation of mass-energy, this is also,
Q = (sum of initial masses – sum of final masses)c 2
10. Radioactivity is the phenomenon in which nuclei of a given species
transform by giving out α or β or γ rays; α -rays are helium nuclei;
459Physics
β -rays are electrons. γ -rays are electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths
shorter than X-rays;
11. Law of radioactive decay : N (t) = N(0) e – λ t
where λ is the decay constant or disintegration constant.
The half-life T 1/2 of a radionuclide is the time in which N has been
reduced to one-half of its initial value. The mean life τ is the time at
which N has been reduced to e –1 of its initial value
T 1/2 =
ln 2
λ
= τ ln 2
12. Energy is released when less tightly bound nuclei are transmuted into
more tightly bound nuclei. In fission, a heavy nucleus like
into two smaller fragments, e.g.,
235
92
U+ n →
1
0
133
51
Sb +
99
41
235
92
U breaks
Nb + 4 1 0 n
13. The fact that more neutrons are produced in fission than are consumed
gives the possibility of a chain reaction with each neutron that is
produced triggering another fission. The chain reaction is uncontrolled
and rapid in a nuclear bomb explosion. It is controlled and steady in
a nuclear reactor. In a reactor, the value of the neutron multiplication
factor k is maintained at 1.
14. In fusion, lighter nuclei combine to form a larger nucleus. Fusion of
hydrogen nuclei into helium nuclei is the source of energy of all stars
including our sun.
Physical Quantity
Symbol
Atomic mass unit
Dimensions
Units
Remarks
[M] u λ [T –1 ] s –1 T 1/2 [T] s Time taken for the decay
of one-half of the initial
number of nuclei present
in a radioactive sample.
Mean life τ [T] s Time at which number of
nuclei has been reduced to
e –1 of its initial value
Activity of a radio-
active sample R [ T –1 ] Bq Measure of the activity
of a radioactive source.
Disintegration or
decay constant
Half-life
Unit of mass for
expressing atomic or
nuclear masses. One
atomic mass unit equals
1/12 th of the mass of 12 C
atom.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
2.
460
The density of nuclear matter is independent of the size of the nucleus.
The mass density of the atom does not follow this rule.
The radius of a nucleus determined by electron scattering is found to
be slightly different from that determined by alpha-particle scattering.Nuclei
This is because electron scattering senses the charge distribution of
the nucleus, whereas alpha and similar particles sense the nuclear
matter.
3. After Einstein showed the equivalence of mass and energy, E = mc 2 ,
we cannot any longer speak of separate laws of conservation of mass
and conservation of energy, but we have to speak of a unified law of
conservation of mass and energy. The most convincing evidence that
this principle operates in nature comes from nuclear physics. It is
central to our understanding of nuclear energy and harnessing it as a
source of power. Using the principle, Q of a nuclear process (decay or
reaction) can be expressed also in terms of initial and final masses.
4. The nature of the binding energy (per nucleon) curve shows that
exothermic nuclear reactions are possible, when two light nuclei fuse
or when a heavy nucleus undergoes fission into nuclei with intermediate
mass.
5. For fusion, the light nuclei must have sufficient initial energy to
overcome the coulomb potential barrier. That is why fusion requires
very high temperatures.
6. Although the binding energy (per nucleon) curve is smooth and slowly
varying, it shows peaks at nuclides like 4 He, 16 O etc. This is considered
as evidence of atom-like shell structure in nuclei.
7. Electrons and positron are a particle-antiparticle pair. They are
identical in mass; their charges are equal in magnitude and opposite.
( It is found that when an electron and a positron come together, they
annihilate each other giving energy in the form of gamma-ray photons.)
8. In â - -decay (electron emission), the particle emitted along with electron
is anti-neutrino ( ν ). On the other hand, the particle emitted in β + -
decay (positron emission) is neutrino (ν). Neutrino and anti-neutrino
are a particle-antiparticle pair. There are anti particles associated
with every particle. What should be antiproton which is the anti
particle of the proton?
9. A free neutron is unstable ( n → p + e – + ν ). But a similar free proton
decay is not possible, since a proton is (slightly) lighter than a neutron.
10. Gamma emission usually follows alpha or beta emission. A nucleus
in an excited (higher) state goes to a lower state by emitting a gamma
photon. A nucleus may be left in an excited state after alpha or beta
emission. Successive emission of gamma rays from the same nucleus
(as in case of 60 Ni, Fig. 13.4) is a clear proof that nuclei also have
discrete energy levels as do the atoms.
11. Radioactivity is an indication of the instability of nuclei. Stability
requires the ratio of neutron to proton to be around 1:1 for light
nuclei. This ratio increases to about 3:2 for heavy nuclei. (More
neutrons are required to overcome the effect of repulsion among the
protons.) Nuclei which are away from the stability ratio, i.e., nuclei
which have an excess of neutrons or protons are unstable. In fact,
only about 10% of knon isotopes (of all elements), are stable. Others
have been either artificially produced in the laboratory by bombarding
α , p, d, n or other particles on targets of stable nuclear species or
identified in astronomical observations of matter in the universe.
461Physics
EXERCISES
You may find the following data useful in solving the exercises:
e = 1.6×10 –19 C
N = 6.023×10 23 per mole
1/(4πε 0 ) = 9 × 10 9 N m 2 /C 2
k = 1.381×10 –23 J 0 K –1
1 MeV = 1.6×10 –13 J
1 year = 3.154×10 7 s
1 u = 931.5 MeV/c 2
m H = 1.007825 u m n = 1.008665 u
m( He ) = 4.002603 u m e = 0.000548 u
4
2
13.1 (a) Two stable isotopes of lithium 63 Li and 73 Li have respective
abundances of 7.5% and 92.5%. These isotopes have masses
6.01512 u and 7.01600 u, respectively. Find the atomic mass
of lithium.
(b) Boron has two stable isotopes, 105 B and 115 B . Their respective
masses are 10.01294 u and 11.00931 u, and the atomic mass of
and 11
.
boron is 10.811 u. Find the abundances of 10
5 B
5 B
13.2 20
21
22
The three stable isotopes of neon: 10
Ne, 10
Ne and 10
Ne have
respective abundances of 90.51%, 0.27% and 9.22%. The atomic
masses of the three isotopes are 19.99 u, 20.99 u and 21.99 u,
respectively. Obtain the average atomic mass of neon.
13.3 Obtain the binding energy (in MeV) of a nitrogen nucleus
given m 147 N =14.00307 u
13.4 Obtain the binding energy of the nuclei
MeV from the following data:
(
)
m ( 56
) = 55.934939 u
26 Fe
Fe and
209
83
14
7
)
N ,
Bi in units of
m ( 209
) = 208.980388 u
83 Bi
13.5 A given coin has a mass of 3.0 g. Calculate the nuclear energy that
would be required to separate all the neutrons and protons from
each other. For simplicity assume that the coin is entirely made of
63
29 Cu atoms (of mass 62.92960 u).
13.6 Write nuclear reaction equations for
(i) α -decay of
226
88
–
(iii) β -decay of
+
(v) β -decay of
Ra
32
15
11
6
P
C
(ii) α -decay of
13.7
13.8
242
94
Pu
– 210
83
+ 97
43
(iv) β -decay of
(vi) β -decay of
(vii) Electron capture of
462
56
26
(
120
54
Bi
Tc
Xe
A radioactive isotope has a half-life of T years. How long will it take
the activity to reduce to a) 3.125%, b) 1% of its original value?
The normal activity of living carbon-containing matter is found to
be about 15 decays per minute for every gram of carbon. This activity
arises from the small proportion of radioactive 146 C present with the
stable carbon isotope 126 C . When the organism is dead, its interaction
with the atmosphere (which maintains the above equilibrium activity)
ceases and its activity begins to drop. From the known half-life (5730
years) of 146 C , and the measured activity, the age of the specimen
can be approximately estimated. This is the principle of 146 C datingNuclei
used in archaeology. Suppose a specimen from Mohenjodaro gives
an activity of 9 decays per minute per gram of carbon. Estimate the
approximate age of the Indus-Valley civilisation.
13.9
Obtain the amount of 60
necessary to provide a radioactive source
27 Co
of 8.0 mCi strength. The half-life of 60
is 5.3 years.
27 Co
90
13.10 The half-life of 38
Sr is 28 years. What is the disintegration rate of
15 mg of this isotope?
13.11 Obtain approximately the ratio of the nuclear radii of the gold isotope
197
107
79 Au and the silver isotope 47 Ag .
13.12 Find the Q-value and the kinetic energy of the emitted α -particle in
and (b) 220
.
the α -decay of (a) 226
88 Ra
86 Rn
Given m ( 226
88 Ra ) = 226.02540 u,
) = 220.01137 u,
m ( 222
86 Rn
13.13 The radionuclide
11
6
11
m ( 222
86 Rn ) = 222.01750 u,
m ( 216
) = 216.00189 u.
84 Po
C decays according to
C → 11 5 B + e + + ν : T 1/2 =20.3 min
The maximum energy of the emitted positron is 0.960 MeV.
Given the mass values:
m ( 116 C ) = 11.011434 u and m ( 116 B ) = 11.009305 u,
calculate Q and compare it with the maximum energy of the positron
emitted.
–
23
13.14 The nucleus 10
Ne decays by β emission. Write down the β -decay
equation and determine the maximum kinetic energy of the
electrons emitted. Given that:
23
m ( 10
Ne ) = 22.994466 u
23
m ( 11
Na ) = 22.089770 u.
13.15 The Q value of a nuclear reaction A + b → C + d is defined by
Q = [ m A + m b – m C – m d ]c 2
where the masses refer to the respective nuclei. Determine from the
given data the Q-value of the following reactions and state whether
the reactions are exothermic or endothermic.
(i) 1 1 H+ 1 3 H → 1 2 H+ 1 2 H
(ii)
12
6
20
C+ 12 6 C → 10
Ne+ 4 2 He
Atomic masses are given to be
m
m
m
m
( 1 2 H ) = 2.014102 u
( 1 3 H ) = 3.016049 u
( 126 C ) = 12.000000 u
20
( 10
Ne ) = 19.992439 u
13.16 Suppose, we think of fission of a 56
nucleus into two equal
26 Fe
28
fragments, 13
.
Is
the
fission
energetically
possible? Argue by
Al
56
working out Q of the process. Given m ( 26 Fe ) = 55.93494 u and
28
m ( 13
Al ) = 27.98191 u.
235
13.17 The fission properties of 239
94 Pu are very similar to those of 92 U . The
average energy released per fission is 180 MeV. How much energy,
463Physics
undergo
in MeV, is released if all the atoms in 1 kg of pure 239
94 Pu
fission?
13.18 A 1000 MW fission reactor consumes half of its fuel in 5.00 y. How
much 235
did it contain initially? Assume that the reactor operates
92 U
80% of the time, that all the energy generated arises from the fission
of 235
92 U and that this nuclide is consumed only by the fission process.
13.19 How long can an electric lamp of 100W be kept glowing by fusion of
2.0 kg of deuterium? Take the fusion reaction as
2
1
H+ 2 1 H → 2 3 He +n +3.27 MeV
13.20 Calculate the height of the potential barrier for a head on collision
of two deuterons. (Hint: The height of the potential barrier is given
by the Coulomb repulsion between the two deuterons when they
just touch each other. Assume that they can be taken as hard
spheres of radius 2.0 fm.)
13.21 From the relation R = R 0 A 1/3 , where R 0 is a constant and A is the
mass number of a nucleus, show that the nuclear matter density is
nearly constant (i.e. independent of A).
13.22 For the β + (positron) emission from a nucleus, there is another
competing process known as electron capture (electron from an inner
orbit, say, the K–shell, is captured by the nucleus and a neutrino is
emitted).
e + + Z A X → Z − A 1 Y + ν
Show that if β + emission is energetically allowed, electron capture
is necessarily allowed but not vice–versa.
ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
13.23 In a periodic table the average atomic mass of magnesium is given
as 24.312 u. The average value is based on their relative natural
abundance on earth. The three isotopes and their masses are 24
12 Mg
26
(23.98504u), 25
(24.98584u)
and
(25.98259u).
The
natural
Mg
Mg
12
12
abundance of 24
12 Mg is 78.99% by mass. Calculate the abundances
of other two isotopes.
13.24 The neutron separation energy is defined as the energy required to
remove a neutron from the nucleus. Obtain the neutron separation
41
energies of the nuclei 20
from the following data:
Ca and 27
13 Al
m ( 40
20 Ca ) = 39.962591 u
41
m ( 20
Ca ) = 40.962278 u
m ( 26
) = 25.986895 u
13 Al
m ( 27
13 Al ) = 26.981541 u
13.25 A source contains two phosphorous radio nuclides 32
(T 1/2 = 14.3d)
15 P
and 33
(T
=
25.3d).
Initially,
10%
of
the
decays
come
from 33
.
P
15
1/2
15 P
How long one must wait until 90% do so?
13.26 Under certain circumstances, a nucleus can decay by emitting a
particle more massive than an α -particle. Consider the following
decay processes:
464
223
88
14
Ra → 209
82 Pb + 6 CNuclei
223
88
4
Ra → 219
86 Rn + 2 He
Calculate the Q-values for these decays and determine that both
are energetically allowed.
13.27 Consider the fission of 238
by fast neutrons. In one fission event,
92 U
no neutrons are emitted and the final end products, after the beta
99
decay of the primary fragments, are 140
58 Ce and 44 Ru . Calculate Q
for this fission process. The relevant atomic and particle masses
are
m ( 238
) =238.05079 u
92 U
m ( 140
) =139.90543 u
58 Ce
m ( 99
44 Ru ) = 98.90594 u
13.28 Consider the D–T reaction (deuterium–tritium fusion)
2
1
H + 3 1 H → 2 4 He + n
(a) Calculate the energy released in MeV in this reaction from the
data:
m ( 21 H )=2.014102 u
m ( 31 H ) =3.016049 u
(b) Consider the radius of both deuterium and tritium to be
approximately 2.0 fm. What is the kinetic energy needed to
overcome the coulomb repulsion between the two nuclei? To what
temperature must the gas be heated to initiate the reaction?
(Hint: Kinetic energy required for one fusion event =average
thermal kinetic energy available with the interacting particles
= 2(3kT/2); k = Boltzman’s constant, T = absolute temperature.)
13.29 Obtain the maximum kinetic energy of β -particles, and the radiation
frequencies of γ decays in the decay scheme shown in Fig. 13.6. You
are given that
m ( 198 Au) = 197.968233 u
m ( 198 Hg) =197.966760 u
FIGURE13.6
465Physics
13.30 Calculate and compare the energy released by a) fusion of 1.0 kg of
hydrogen deep within Sun and b) the fission of 1.0 kg of 235 U in a
fission reactor.
13.31 Suppose India had a target of producing by 2020 AD, 200,000 MW
of electric power, ten percent of which was to be obtained from nuclear
power plants. Suppose we are given that, on an average, the efficiency
of utilization (i.e. conversion to electric energy) of thermal energy
produced in a reactor was 25%. How much amount of fissionable
uranium would our country need per year by 2020? Take the heat
energy per fission of 235 U to be about 200MeV.
466
Chapter Fourteen
SEMICONDUCTOR
ELECTRONICS:
MATERIALS, DEVICES
AND SIMPLE CIRCUITS
14.1 I NTRODUCTION
Devices in which a controlled flow of electrons can be obtained are the
basic building blocks of all the electronic circuits. Before the discovery of
transistor in 1948, such devices were mostly vacuum tubes (also called
valves) like the vacuum diode which has two electrodes, viz., anode (often
called plate) and cathode; triode which has three electrodes – cathode,
plate and grid; tetrode and pentode (respectively with 4 and 5 electrodes).
In a vacuum tube, the electrons are supplied by a heated cathode and
the controlled flow of these electrons in vacuum is obtained by varying
the voltage between its different electrodes. Vacuum is required in the
inter-electrode space; otherwise the moving electrons may lose their
energy on collision with the air molecules in their path. In these devices
the electrons can flow only from the cathode to the anode (i.e., only in one
direction). Therefore, such devices are generally referred to as valves.
These vacuum tube devices are bulky, consume high power, operate
generally at high voltages (~100 V) and have limited life and low reliability.
The seed of the development of modern solid-state semiconductor
electronics goes back to 1930’s when it was realised that some solid-
state semiconductors and their junctions offer the possibility of controlling
the number and the direction of flow of charge carriers through them.
Simple excitations like light, heat or small applied voltage can change
the number of mobile charges in a semiconductor. Note that the supplyPhysics
and flow of charge carriers in the semiconductor devices are within the
solid itself, while in the earlier vacuum tubes/valves, the mobile electrons
were obtained from a heated cathode and they were made to flow in an
evacuated space or vacuum. No external heating or large evacuated space
is required by the semiconductor devices. They are small in size, consume
low power, operate at low voltages and have long life and high reliability.
Even the Cathode Ray Tubes (CRT) used in television and computer
monitors which work on the principle of vacuum tubes are being replaced
by Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors with supporting solid state
electronics. Much before the full implications of the semiconductor devices
was formally understood, a naturally occurring crystal of galena (Lead
sulphide, PbS) with a metal point contact attached to it was used as
detector of radio waves.
In the following sections, we will introduce the basic concepts of
semiconductor physics and discuss some semiconductor devices like
junction diodes (a 2-electrode device) and bipolar junction transistor (a
3-electrode device). A few circuits illustrating their applications will also
be described.
14.2 C LASSIFICATION OF M ETALS , C ONDUCTORS
S EMICONDUCTORS
468
AND
On the basis of conductivity
On the basis of the relative values of electrical conductivity ( σ ) or resistivity
( ρ = 1/ σ ), the solids are broadly classified as:
(i) Metals: They possess very low resistivity (or high conductivity).
ρ ~ 10 –2 – 10 –8 Ω m
σ ~ 10 2 – 10 8 S m –1
(ii) Semiconductors: They have resistivity or conductivity intermediate
to metals and insulators.
ρ ~ 10 –5 – 10 6 Ω m
σ ~ 10 5 – 10 –6 S m –1
(iii)Insulators: They have high resistivity (or low conductivity).
ρ ~ 10 11 – 10 19 Ω m
σ ~ 10 –11 – 10 –19 S m –1
The values of ρ and σ given above are indicative of magnitude and
could well go outside the ranges as well. Relative values of the resistivity
are not the only criteria for distinguishing metals, insulators and
semiconductors from each other. There are some other differences, which
will become clear as we go along in this chapter.
Our interest in this chapter is in the study of semiconductors which
could be:
(i) Elemental semiconductors: Si and Ge
(ii) Compound semiconductors: Examples are:
• Inorganic: CdS, GaAs, CdSe, InP, etc.
• Organic: anthracene, doped pthalocyanines, etc.
• Organic polymers: polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene, etc.
Most of the currently available semiconductor devices are based on
elemental semiconductors Si or Ge and compound inorganicSemiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
semiconductors. However, after 1990, a few semiconductor devices using
organic semiconductors and semiconducting polymers have been
developed signalling the birth of a futuristic technology of polymer-
electronics and molecular-electronics. In this chapter, we will restrict
ourselves to the study of inorganic semiconductors, particularly
elemental semiconductors Si and Ge. The general concepts introduced
here for discussing the elemental semiconductors, by-and-large, apply
to most of the compound semiconductors as well.
On the basis of energy bands
According to the Bohr atomic model, in an isolated atom the energy of
any of its electrons is decided by the orbit in which it revolves. But when
the atoms come together to form a solid they are close to each other. So
the outer orbits of electrons from neighbouring atoms would come very
close or could even overlap. This would make the nature of electron motion
in a solid very different from that in an isolated atom.
Inside the crystal each electron has a unique position and no two
electrons see exactly the same pattern of surrounding charges. Because
of this, each electron will have a different energy level. These different
energy levels with continuous energy variation form what are called
energy bands. The energy band which includes the energy levels of the
valence electrons is called the valence band. The energy band above the
valence band is called the conduction band. With no external energy, all
the valence electrons will reside in the valence band. If the lowest level in
the conduction band happens to be lower than the highest level of the
valence band, the electrons from the valence band can easily move into
the conduction band. Normally the conduction band is empty. But when
it overlaps on the valence band electrons can move freely into it. This is
the case with metallic conductors.
If there is some gap between the conduction band and the valence
band, electrons in the valence band all remain bound and no free electrons
are available in the conduction band. This makes the material an
insulator. But some of the electrons from the valence band may gain
external energy to cross the gap between the conduction band and the
valence band. Then these electrons will move into the conduction band.
At the same time they will create vacant energy levels in the valence band
where other valence electrons can move. Thus the process creates the
possibility of conduction due to electrons in conduction band as well as
due to vacancies in the valence band.
Let us consider what happens in the case of Si or Ge crystal containing
N atoms. For Si, the outermost orbit is the third orbit (n = 3), while for Ge
it is the fourth orbit (n = 4). The number of electrons in the outermost
orbit is 4 (2s and 2p electrons). Hence, the total number of outer electrons
in the crystal is 4N. The maximum possible number of electrons in the
outer orbit is 8 (2s + 6p electrons). So, for the 4N valence electrons there
are 8N available energy states. These 8N discrete energy levels can either
form a continuous band or they may be grouped in different bands
depending upon the distance between the atoms in the crystal (see box
on Band Theory of Solids).
At the distance between the atoms in the crystal lattices of Si and Ge,
the energy band of these 8N states is split apart into two which are
separated by an energy gap E g (Fig. 14.1). The lower band which is
469Physics
completely occupied by the 4N valence electrons at temperature of absolute
zero is the valence band. The other band consisting of 4N energy states,
called the conduction band, is completely empty at absolute zero.
B AND
THEORY OF SOLIDS
Consider that the Si or Ge crystal
contains N atoms. Electrons of each
atom will have discrete energies in
different orbits. The electron energy
will be same if all the atoms are
isolated, i.e., separated from each
other by a large distance. However,
in a crystal, the atoms are close to
each other (2 to 3 Å) and therefore
the electrons interact with each
other and also with the
neighbouring atomic cores. The
overlap (or interaction) will be more
felt by the electrons in the
outermost orbit while the inner
orbit or core electron energies may
remain unaffected. Therefore, for understanding electron energies in Si or Ge crystal, we
need to consider the changes in the energies of the electrons in the outermost orbit only.
For Si, the outermost orbit is the third orbit (n = 3), while for Ge it is the fourth orbit
(n = 4). The number of electrons in the outermost orbit is 4 (2s and 2p electrons). Hence,
the total number of outer electrons in the crystal is 4N. The maximum possible number of
outer electrons in the orbit is 8 (2s + 6p electrons). So, out of the 4N electrons, 2N electrons
are in the 2N s-states (orbital quantum number l = 0) and 2N electrons are in the available
6N p-states. Obviously, some p-electron states are empty as shown in the extreme right of
Figure. This is the case of well separated or isolated atoms [region A of Figure].
Suppose these atoms start coming nearer to each other to form a solid. The energies
of these electrons in the outermost orbit may change (both increase and decrease) due to
the interaction between the electrons of different atoms. The 6N states for l = 1, which
originally had identical energies in the isolated atoms, spread out and form an energy
band [region B in Figure]. Similarly, the 2N states for l = 0, having identical energies in
the isolated atoms, split into a second band (carefully see the region B of Figure) separated
from the first one by an energy gap.
At still smaller spacing, however, there comes a region in which the bands merge with
each other. The lowest energy state that is a split from the upper atomic level appears to
drop below the upper state that has come from the lower atomic level. In this region (region
C in Figure), no energy gap exists where the upper and lower energy states get mixed.
Finally, if the distance between the atoms further decreases, the energy bands again
split apart and are separated by an energy gap E g (region D in Figure). The total number
of available energy states 8N has been re-apportioned between the two bands (4N states
each in the lower and upper energy bands). Here the significant point is that there are
exactly as many states in the lower band (4N ) as there are available valence electrons
from the atoms (4N ).
Therefore, this band ( called the valence band ) is completely filled while the upper
band is completely empty. The upper band is called the conduction band.
470Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
The lowest energy level in the
conduction band is shown as E C and
highest energy level in the valence band
is shown as E V . Above E C and below E V
there are a large number of closely spaced
energy levels, as shown in Fig. 14.1.
The gap between the top of the valence
band and bottom of the conduction band
is called the energy band gap (Energy gap
E g ). It may be large, small, or zero,
depending upon the material. These
different situations, are depicted in Fig.
14.2 and discussed below:
Case I: This refers to a situation, as
shown in Fig. 14.2(a). One can have a
metal either when the conduction band
FIGURE 14.1 The energy band positions in a
is partially filled and the balanced band
semiconductor
at 0 K. The upper band, called the
is partially empty or when the conduction
conduction
band,
consists of infinitely large number
and valance bands overlap. When there
of closely spaced energy states. The lower band,
is overlap electrons from valence band can
called the valence band, consists of closely spaced
easily move into the conduction band.
completely filled energy states.
This situation makes a large number of
electrons available for electrical conduction. When the valence band is
partially empty, electrons from its lower level can move to higher level
making conduction possible. Therefore, the resistance of such materials
is low or the conductivity is high.
FIGURE 14.2 Difference between energy bands of (a) metals,
(b) insulators and (c) semiconductors.
471Physics
Case II: In this case, as shown in Fig. 14.2(b), a large band gap E g exists
(E g > 3 eV). There are no electrons in the conduction band, and therefore
no electrical conduction is possible. Note that the energy gap is so large
that electrons cannot be excited from the valence band to the conduction
band by thermal excitation. This is the case of insulators.
Case III: This situation is shown in Fig. 14.2(c). Here a finite but small
band gap (E g < 3 eV) exists. Because of the small band gap, at room
temperature some electrons from valence band can acquire enough
energy to cross the energy gap and enter the conduction band. These
electrons (though small in numbers) can move in the conduction band.
Hence, the resistance of semiconductors is not as high as that of the
insulators.
In this section we have made a broad classification of metals,
conductors and semiconductors. In the section which follows you will
learn the conduction process in semiconductors.
14.3 I NTRINSIC S EMICONDUCTOR
We shall take the most common case of Ge and Si whose lattice structure
is shown in Fig. 14.3. These structures are called the diamond-like
structures. Each atom is surrounded by four nearest neighbours. We
know that Si and Ge have four valence electrons. In its crystalline
structure, every Si or Ge atom tends to share one of its four valence
electrons with each of its four nearest neighbour atoms, and also to take
share of one electron from each such neighbour. These shared electron
pairs are referred to as forming a covalent bond or simply a valence
bond. The two shared electrons can be assumed to shuttle back-and-
forth between the associated atoms holding them together strongly.
Figure 14.4 schematically shows the 2-dimensional representation of Si
or Ge structure shown in Fig. 14.3 which overemphasises the covalent
bond. It shows an idealised picture in which no bonds are broken (all
bonds are intact). Such a situation arises at low
temperatures. As the temperature increases, more
thermal energy becomes available to these electrons
and some of these electrons may break–away
(becoming free electrons contributing to conduction).
The thermal energy effectively ionises only a few atoms
in the crystalline lattice and creates a vacancy in the
bond as shown in Fig. 14.5(a). The neighbourhood,
from which the free electron (with charge –q ) has come
out leaves a vacancy with an effective charge (+q ). This
vacancy with the effective positive electronic charge is
called a hole. The hole behaves as an apparent free
particle with effective positive charge.
In intrinsic semiconductors, the number of free
FIGURE 14.3 Three-dimensional dia-
electrons,
n e is equal to the number of holes, n h . That is
mond-like crystal structure for Carbon,
n
=
n
(14.1)
Silicon or Germanium with
e
h = n i
where
n
is
called
intrinsic
carrier
concentration.
respective lattice spacing a equal
i
Semiconductors posses the unique property in
to 3.56, 5.43 and 5.66 Å.
472
which, apart from electrons, the holes also move.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Suppose there is a hole at site 1 as shown in
Fig. 14.5(a). The movement of holes can be
visualised as shown in Fig. 14.5(b). An electron
from the covalent bond at site 2 may jump to
the vacant site 1 (hole). Thus, after such a jump,
the hole is at site 2 and the site 1 has now an
electron. Therefore, apparently, the hole has
moved from site 1 to site 2. Note that the electron
originally set free [Fig. 14.5(a)] is not involved
in this process of hole motion. The free electron
moves completely independently as conduction
electron and gives rise to an electron current, I e
under an applied electric field. Remember that
the motion of hole is only a convenient way of
FIGURE 14.4 Schematic two-dimensional
describing the actual motion of bound electrons,
representation of Si or Ge structure showing
whenever there is an empty bond anywhere in
covalent bonds at low temperature
(all bonds intact). +4 symbol
the crystal. Under the action of an electric field,
indicates
inner cores of Si or Ge.
these holes move towards negative potential
giving the hole current, I h . The total current, I is
thus the sum of the electron current I e and the
hole current I h :
I = I e + I h
(14.2)
It may be noted that apart from the process of generation of conduction
electrons and holes, a simultaneous process of recombination occurs in
which the electrons recombine with the holes. At equilibrium, the rate of
generation is equal to the rate of recombination of charge carriers. The
recombination occurs due to an electron colliding with a hole.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 14.5 (a) Schematic model of generation of hole at site 1 and conduction electron
due to thermal energy at moderate temperatures. (b) Simplified representation of
possible thermal motion of a hole. The electron from the lower left hand covalent bond
(site 2) goes to the earlier hole site1, leaving a hole at its site indicating an
473
apparent movement of the hole from site 1 to site 2.Physics
FIGURE 14.6 (a) An intrinsic semiconductor at T = 0 K
behaves like insulator. (b) At T > 0 K, four thermally generated
electron-hole pairs. The filled circles ( ) represent electrons
and empty fields ( ) represent holes.
An intrinsic semiconductor
will behave like an insulator at
T = 0 K as shown in Fig. 14.6(a).
It is the thermal energy at
higher temperatures (T > 0K),
which excites some electrons
from the valence band to the
conduction band. These
thermally excited electrons at
T > 0 K, partially occupy the
conduction band. Therefore,
the energy-band diagram of an
intrinsic semiconductor will be
as shown in Fig. 14.6(b). Here,
some electrons are shown in
the conduction band. These
have come from the valence
band leaving equal number of
holes there.
Example 14.1 C, Si and Ge have same lattice structure. Why is C
insulator while Si and Ge intrinsic semiconductors?
Solution The 4 bonding electrons of C, Si or Ge lie, respectively, in
the second, third and fourth orbit. Hence, energy required to take
out an electron from these atoms (i.e., ionisation energy E g ) will be
least for Ge, followed by Si and highest for C. Hence, number of free
electrons for conduction in Ge and Si are significant but negligibly
small for C.
14.4 E XTRINSIC S EMICONDUCTOR
474
The conductivity of an intrinsic semiconductor depends on its
temperature, but at room temperature its conductivity is very low. As
such, no important electronic devices can be developed using these
semiconductors. Hence there is a necessity of improving their
conductivity. This can be done by making use of impurities.
When a small amount, say, a few parts per million (ppm), of a suitable
impurity is added to the pure semiconductor, the conductivity of the
semiconductor is increased manifold. Such materials are known as
extrinsic semiconductors or impurity semiconductors. The deliberate
addition of a desirable impurity is called doping and the impurity atoms
are called dopants. Such a material is also called a doped semiconductor.
The dopant has to be such that it does not distort the original pure
semiconductor lattice. It occupies only a very few of the original
semiconductor atom sites in the crystal. A necessary condition to attain
this is that the sizes of the dopant and the semiconductor atoms should
be nearly the same.
There are two types of dopants used in doping the tetravalent Si
or Ge:
(i) Pentavalent (valency 5); like Arsenic (As), Antimony (Sb), Phosphorous
(P), etc.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(ii) Trivalent (valency 3); like Indium (In),
Boron (B), Aluminium (Al), etc.
We shall now discuss how the doping
changes the number of charge carriers (and
hence the conductivity) of semiconductors.
Si or Ge belongs to the fourth group in the
Periodic table and, therefore, we choose the
dopant element from nearby fifth or third
group, expecting and taking care that the
size of the dopant atom is nearly the same as
that of Si or Ge. Interestingly, the pentavalent
and trivalent dopants in Si or Ge give two
entirely different types of semiconductors as
discussed below.
(i) n-type semiconductor
Suppose we dope Si or Ge with a pentavalent
element as shown in Fig. 14.7. When an atom
of +5 valency element occupies the position
of an atom in the crystal lattice of Si, four of
its electrons bond with the four silicon
neighbours while the fifth remains very
weakly bound to its parent atom. This is
because the four electrons participating in
bonding are seen as part of the effective core FIGURE 14.7 (a) Pentavalent donor atom (As, Sb,
P, etc.) doped for tetravalent Si or Ge giving n-
of the atom by the fifth electron. As a result
type semiconductor, and (b) Commonly used
the ionisation energy required to set this
schematic representation of n-type material
electron free is very small and even at room
which shows only the fixed cores of the
temperature it will be free to move in the
substituent donors with one additional effective
lattice of the semiconductor. For example, the positive charge and its associated extra electron.
energy required is ~ 0.01 eV for germanium,
and 0.05 eV for silicon, to separate this
electron from its atom. This is in contrast to the energy required to jump
the forbidden band (about 0.72 eV for germanium and about 1.1 eV for
silicon) at room temperature in the intrinsic semiconductor. Thus, the
pentavalent dopant is donating one extra electron for conduction and
hence is known as donor impurity. The number of electrons made
available for conduction by dopant atoms depends strongly upon the
doping level and is independent of any increase in ambient temperature.
On the other hand, the number of free electrons (with an equal number
of holes) generated by Si atoms, increases weakly with temperature.
In a doped semiconductor the total number of conduction electrons
n e is due to the electrons contributed by donors and those generated
intrinsically, while the total number of holes n h is only due to the holes
from the intrinsic source. But the rate of recombination of holes would
increase due to the increase in the number of electrons. As a result, the
number of holes would get reduced further.
Thus, with proper level of doping the number of conduction electrons
475
can be made much larger than the number of holes. Hence in an extrinsicPhysics
semiconductor doped with pentavalent impurity, electrons
become the majority carriers and holes the minority carriers.
These semiconductors are, therefore, known as n-type
semiconductors. For n-type semiconductors, we have,
n e >> n h
(14.3)
(ii) p-type semiconductor
This is obtained when Si or Ge is doped with a trivalent impurity
like Al, B, In, etc. The dopant has one valence electron less than
Si or Ge and, therefore, this atom can form covalent bonds with
neighbouring three Si atoms but does not have any electron to
offer to the fourth Si atom. So the bond between the fourth
neighbour and the trivalent atom has a vacancy or hole as shown
in Fig. 14.8. Since the neighbouring Si atom in the lattice wants
an electron in place of a hole, an electron in the outer orbit of
an atom in the neighbourhood may jump to fill this vacancy,
leaving a vacancy or hole at its own site. Thus the hole is
available for conduction. Note that the trivalent foreign atom
becomes effectively negatively charged when it shares fourth
electron with neighbouring Si atom. Therefore, the dopant atom
of p-type material can be treated as core of one negative charge
along with its associated hole as shown in Fig. 14.8(b). It is
obvious that one acceptor atom gives one hole. These holes are
in addition to the intrinsically generated holes while the source
of conduction electrons is only intrinsic generation. Thus, for
such a material, the holes are the majority carriers and electrons
FIGURE 14.8 (a) Trivalent
are minority carriers. Therefore, extrinsic semiconductors doped
acceptor atom (In, Al, B etc.)
with trivalent impurity are called p-type semiconductors. For
doped in tetravalent Si or Ge
p-type semiconductors, the recombination process will reduce
lattice giving p-type semicon-
the number (n i )of intrinsically generated electrons to n e . We
ductor. (b) Commonly used
have,
for p-type semiconductors
schematic representation of
n h >> n e
(14.4)
p-type material which shows
only the fixed core of the
Note that the crystal maintains an overall charge neutrality
substituent acceptor with
as the charge of additional charge carriers is just equal and
one effective additional
opposite to that of the ionised cores in the lattice.
negative charge and its
In extrinsic semiconductors, because of the abundance of
associated hole.
majority current carriers, the minority carriers produced
thermally have more chance of meeting majority carriers and
thus getting destroyed. Hence, the dopant, by adding a large number of
current carriers of one type, which become the majority carriers, indirectly
helps to reduce the intrinsic concentration of minority carriers.
The semiconductor’s energy band structure is affected by doping. In
the case of extrinsic semiconductors, additional energy states due to donor
impurities (E D ) and acceptor impurities (E A ) also exist. In the energy band
diagram of n-type Si semiconductor, the donor energy level E D is slightly
below the bottom E C of the conduction band and electrons from this level
move into the conduction band with very small supply of energy. At room
temperature, most of the donor atoms get ionised but very few (~10 –12 )
atoms of Si get ionised. So the conduction band will have most electrons
476
coming from the donor impurities, as shown in Fig. 14.9(a). Similarly,Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
for p-type semiconductor, the acceptor energy level E A is slightly above
the top E V of the valence band as shown in Fig. 14.9(b). With very small
supply of energy an electron from the valence band can jump to the level
E A and ionise the acceptor negatively. (Alternately, we can also say that
with very small supply of energy the hole from level E A sinks down into
the valence band. Electrons rise up and holes fall down when they gain
external energy.) At room temperature, most of the acceptor atoms get
ionised leaving holes in the valence band. Thus at room temperature the
density of holes in the valence band is predominantly due to impurity in
the extrinsic semiconductor. The electron and hole concentration in a
semiconductor in thermal equilibrium is given by
n e n h = n i 2
(14.5)
Though the above description is grossly approximate and
hypothetical, it helps in understanding the difference between metals,
insulators and semiconductors (extrinsic and intrinsic) in a simple
manner. The difference in the resistivity of C, Si and Ge depends upon
the energy gap between their conduction and valence bands. For C
(diamond), Si and Ge, the energy gaps are 5.4 eV, 1.1 eV and 0.7 eV,
respectively. Sn also is a group IV element but it is a metal because the
energy gap in its case is 0 eV.
FIGURE 14.9 Energy bands of (a) n-type semiconductor at T > 0K, (b) p-type
semiconductor at T > 0K.
Example 14.2 Suppose a pure Si crystal has 5 × 10 28 atoms m –3 . It is
doped by 1 ppm concentration of pentavalent As. Calculate the
number of electrons and holes. Given that n i =1.5 × 10 16 m –3 .
~ 4.5 × 10 9 m –3
Solution Note that thermally generated electrons (n i ~10 16 m –3 ) are
negligibly small as compared to those produced by doping.
Therefore, n e ≈ N D .
Since n e n h = n i 2 , The number of holes
n h = (2.25 × 10 32 )/(5 ×10 22 )
477Physics
14.5 p-n J UNCTION
A p-n junction is the basic building block of many semiconductor devices
like diodes, transistor, etc. A clear understanding of the junction behaviour
is important to analyse the working of other semiconductor devices.
We will now try to understand how a junction is formed and how the
junction behaves under the influence of external applied voltage (also
called bias).
14.5.1 p-n junction formation
Consider a thin p-type silicon (p-Si) semiconductor wafer. By adding
precisely a small quantity of pentavelent impurity, part of the p-Si wafer
can be converted into n-Si. There are several processes by which a
semiconductor can be formed. The wafer now contains p-region and
n-region and a metallurgical junction between p-, and n- region.
Two important processes occur during the formation of a p-n junction:
diffusion and drift. We know that in an n-type semiconductor, the
concentration of electrons (number of electrons per unit volume) is more
compared to the concentration of holes. Similarly, in a p-type
semiconductor, the concentration of holes is more than the concentration
of electrons. During the formation of p-n junction, and due to the
concentration gradient across p-, and n- sides, holes diffuse from p-side
to n-side (p → n) and electrons diffuse from n-side to p-side (n → p). This
motion of charge carries gives rise to diffusion current across the junction.
When an electron diffuses from n → p, it leaves behind an ionised
donor on n-side. This ionised donor (positive charge) is immobile as it is
bonded to the surrounding atoms. As the electrons continue to diffuse
from n → p, a layer of positive charge (or positive space-charge region) on
n-side of the junction is developed.
Similarly, when a hole diffuses from p → n due to the concentration
gradient, it leaves behind an ionised acceptor (negative charge) which is
immobile. As the holes continue to diffuse, a layer of negative charge (or
negative space-charge region) on the p-side of the junction is developed.
This space-charge region on either side of the junction together is known
as depletion region as the electrons and holes taking part in the initial
movement across the junction depleted the region of its
free charges (Fig. 14.10). The thickness of depletion region
is of the order of one-tenth of a micrometre. Due to the
positive space-charge region on n-side of the junction and
negative space charge region on p-side of the junction,
an electric field directed from positive charge towards
negative charge develops. Due to this field, an electron on
p-side of the junction moves to n-side and a hole on n-
side of the junction moves to p-side. The motion of charge
carriers due to the electric field is called drift. Thus a
FIGURE 14.10 p-n junction
drift current, which is opposite in direction to the diffusion
formation process.
478
current (Fig. 14.10) starts.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Initially, diffusion current is large and drift current is small.
As the diffusion process continues, the space-charge regions
on either side of the junction extend, thus increasing the electric
field strength and hence drift current. This process continues
until the diffusion current equals the drift current. Thus a p-n
junction is formed. In a p-n junction under equilibrium there
is no net current.
The loss of electrons from the n-region and the gain of
electron by the p-region causes a difference of potential across
the junction of the two regions. The polarity of this potential is
such as to oppose further flow of carriers so that a condition of
equilibrium exists. Figure 14.11 shows the p-n junction at
equilibrium and the potential across the junction. The
n-material has lost electrons, and p material has acquired
electrons. The n material is thus positive relative to the p
material. Since this potential tends to prevent the movement of
electron from the n region into the p region, it is often called a
barrier potential.
FIGURE 14.11 (a) Diode under
equilibrium (V = 0), (b) Barrier
potential under no bias.
Solution No! Any slab, howsoever flat, will have roughness much
larger than the inter-atomic crystal spacing (~2 to 3 Å) and hence
continuous contact at the atomic level will not be possible. The junction
will behave as a discontinuity for the flowing charge carriers.
3
Example 14.3 Can we take one slab of p-type semiconductor and
physically join it to another n-type semiconductor to get p-n junction?
14.6 S EMICONDUCTOR D IODE
A semiconductor diode [Fig. 14.12(a)] is basically a
p-n junction with metallic contacts provided at the
ends for the application of an external voltage. It is a
two terminal device. A p-n junction diode is
symbolically represented as shown in Fig. 14.12(b).
The direction of arrow indicates the conventional
direction of current (when the diode is under forward
bias). The equilibrium barrier potential can be altered
by applying an external voltage V across the diode.
The situation of p-n junction diode under equilibrium
(without bias) is shown in Fig. 14.11(a) and (b).
FIGURE 14.12 (a) Semiconductor diode,
(b) Symbol for p-n junction diode.
14.6.1 p-n junction diode under forward bias
When an external voltage V is applied across a semiconductor diode such
that p-side is connected to the positive terminal of the battery and n-side
to the negative terminal [Fig. 14.13(a)], it is said to be forward biased.
The applied voltage mostly drops across the depletion region and the
voltage drop across the p-side and n-side of the junction is negligible.
(This is because the resistance of the depletion region – a region where
there are no charges – is very high compared to the resistance of n-side
and p-side.) The direction of the applied voltage (V ) is opposite to the
479Physics
FIGURE 14.13 (a) p-n
junction diode under forward
bias, (b) Barrier potential
(1) without battery, (2) Low
battery voltage, and (3) High
voltage battery.
built-in potential V 0 . As a result, the depletion layer width
decreases and the barrier height is reduced [Fig. 14.13(b)]. The
effective barrier height under forward bias is (V 0 – V ).
If the applied voltage is small, the barrier potential will be
reduced only slightly below the equilibrium value, and only a
small number of carriers in the material—those that happen to
be in the uppermost energy levels—will possess enough energy
to cross the junction. So the current will be small. If we increase
the applied voltage significantly, the barrier height will be reduced
and more number of carriers will have the required energy. Thus
the current increases.
Due to the applied voltage, electrons from n-side cross the
depletion region and reach p-side (where they are minority
carries). Similarly, holes from p-side cross the junction and reach
the n-side (where they are minority carries). This process under
forward bias is known as minority carrier injection. At the
junction boundary, on each side, the minority carrier
concentration increases significantly compared to the locations
far from the junction.
Due to this concentration gradient, the injected electrons on
p-side diffuse from the junction edge of p-side to the other end
of p-side. Likewise, the injected holes on n-side diffuse from the
junction edge of n-side to the other end of n-side
(Fig. 14.14). This motion of charged carriers on either side
gives rise to current. The total diode forward current is sum
of hole diffusion current and conventional current due to
electron diffusion. The magnitude of this current is usually
in mA.
14.6.2 p-n junction diode under reverse bias
FIGURE 14.14 Forward bias
minority carrier injection.
480
When an external voltage (V ) is applied across the diode such
that n-side is positive and p-side is negative, it is said to be
reverse biased [Fig.14.15(a)]. The applied voltage mostly
drops across the depletion region. The direction of applied voltage is same
as the direction of barrier potential. As a result, the barrier height increases
and the depletion region widens due to the change in the electric field.
The effective barrier height under reverse bias is (V 0 + V ), [Fig. 14.15(b)].
This suppresses the flow of electrons from n → p and holes from p → n.
Thus, diffusion current, decreases enormously compared to the diode
under forward bias.
The electric field direction of the junction is such that if electrons on
p-side or holes on n-side in their random motion come close to the
junction, they will be swept to its majority zone. This drift of carriers
gives rise to current. The drift current is of the order of a few μA. This is
quite low because it is due to the motion of carriers from their minority
side to their majority side across the junction. The drift current is also
there under forward bias but it is negligible (μA) when compared with
current due to injected carriers which is usually in mA.
The diode reverse current is not very much dependent on the applied
voltage. Even a small voltage is sufficient to sweep the minority carriers
from one side of the junction to the other side of the junction. The currentSemiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
is not limited by the magnitude of the applied voltage but is
limited due to the concentration of the minority carrier on either
side of the junction.
The current under reverse bias is essentially voltage
independent upto a critical reverse bias voltage, known as
breakdown voltage (V br ). When V = V br , the diode reverse current
increases sharply. Even a slight increase in the bias voltage causes
large change in the current. If the reverse current is not limited by
an external circuit below the rated value (specified by the
manufacturer) the p-n junction will get destroyed. Once it exceeds
the rated value, the diode gets destroyed due to overheating. This
can happen even for the diode under forward bias, if the forward
current exceeds the rated value.
The circuit arrangement for studying the V-I characteristics
of a diode, (i.e., the variation of current as a function of applied
FIGURE 14.15 (a) Diode
voltage) are shown in Fig. 14.16(a) and (b). The battery is connected
under reverse bias,
to the diode through a potentiometer (or reheostat) so that the
(b) Barrier potential under
applied voltage to the diode can be changed. For different values
reverse bias.
of voltages, the value of the current is noted. A graph between V
and I is obtained as in Fig. 14.16(c). Note that in forward bias
measurement, we use a milliammeter since the expected current is large
(as explained in the earlier section) while a micrometer is used in reverse
bias to measure the current. You can see in Fig. 14.16(c) that in forward
FIGURE 14.16 Experimental circuit arrangement for studying V-I characteristics of
a p-n junction diode (a) in forward bias , (b) in reverse bias. (c) Typical V-I
481
characteristics of a silicon diode.Physics
bias, the current first increases very slowly, almost negligibly, till the
voltage across the diode crosses a certain value. After the characteristic
voltage, the diode current increases significantly (exponentially), even for
a very small increase in the diode bias voltage. This voltage is called the
threshold voltage or cut-in voltage (~0.2V for germanium diode and
~0.7 V for silicon diode).
For the diode in reverse bias, the current is very small (~μA) and almost
remains constant with change in bias. It is called reverse saturation
current. However, for special cases, at very high reverse bias (break down
voltage), the current suddenly increases. This special action of the diode
is discussed later in Section 14.8. The general purpose diode are not
used beyond the reverse saturation current region.
The above discussion shows that the p-n junction diode primerly
allows the flow of current only in one direction (forward bias). The forward
bias resistance is low as compared to the reverse bias resistance. This
property is used for rectification of ac voltages as discussed in the next
section. For diodes, we define a quantity called dynamic resistance as
the ratio of small change in voltage ∆V to a small change in current ∆I:
r d =
∆ V
∆ I
(14.6)
Example 14.4 The V-I characteristic of a silicon diode is shown in
the Fig. 14.17. Calculate the resistance of the diode at (a) I D = 15 mA
and (b) V D = –10 V.
482
FIGURE 14.17
Solution Considering the diode characteristics as a straight line
between I = 10 mA to I = 20 mA passing through the origin, we can
calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law.
(a) From the curve, at I = 20 mA, V = 0.8 V, I = 10 mA, V = 0.7 V
r f b = ∆V/∆I = 0.1V/10 mA = 10 Ω
(b) From the curve at V = –10 V, I = –1 μA,
Therefore,
r rb = 10 V/1μA= 1.0 × 10 7 ΩSemiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
14.7 A PPLICATION OF J UNCTION D IODE AS A R ECTIFIER
From the V-I characteristic of a junction diode we see that it allows current
to pass only when it is forward biased. So if an alternating voltage is
applied across a diode the current flows only in that part of the cycle
when the diode is forward biased. This property
is used to rectify alternating voltages and the
circuit used for this purpose is called a rectifier.
If an alternating voltage is applied across a
diode in series with a load, a pulsating voltage will
appear across the load only during the half cycles
of the ac input during which the diode is forward
biased. Such rectifier circuit, as shown in
Fig. 14.18, is called a half-wave rectifier. The
secondary of a transformer supplies the desired
ac voltage across terminals A and B. When the
voltage at A is positive, the diode is forward biased
and it conducts. When A is negative, the diode is
reverse-biased and it does not conduct. The reverse
saturation current of a diode is negligible and can
be considered equal to zero for practical purposes.
(The reverse breakdown voltage of the diode must
be sufficiently higher than the peak ac voltage at
the secondary of the transformer to protect the
diode from reverse breakdown.)
Therefore, in the positive half-cycle of ac there
FIGURE 14.18 (a) Half-wave rectifier
is a current through the load resistor R L and we
circuit, (b) Input ac voltage and output
get an output voltage, as shown in Fig. 14.18(b),
voltage waveforms from the rectifier circuit.
whereas there is no current in the negative half-
cycle. In the next positive half-cycle, again we get
the output voltage. Thus, the output voltage, though still varying, is
restricted to only one direction and is said to be rectified. Since the
rectified output of this circuit is only for half of the input ac wave it is
called as half-wave rectifier.
The circuit using two diodes, shown in Fig. 14.19(a), gives output
rectified voltage corresponding to both the positive as well as negative
half of the ac cycle. Hence, it is known as full-wave rectifier. Here the
p-side of the two diodes are connected to the ends of the secondary of the
transformer. The n-side of the diodes are connected together and the
output is taken between this common point of diodes and the midpoint
of the secondary of the transformer. So for a full-wave rectifier the
secondary of the transformer is provided with a centre tapping and so it
is called centre-tap transformer. As can be seen from Fig.14.19(c) the
voltage rectified by each diode is only half the total secondary voltage.
Each diode rectifies only for half the cycle, but the two do so for alternate
cycles. Thus, the output between their common terminals and the centre-
tap of the transformer becomes a full-wave rectifier output. (Note that
there is another circuit of full wave rectifier which does not need a centre-
483
tap transformer but needs four diodes.) Suppose the input voltage to APhysics
with respect to the centre tap at any instant
is positive. It is clear that, at that instant,
voltage at B being out of phase will be
negative as shown in Fig.14.19(b). So, diode
D 1 gets forward biased and conducts (while
D 2 being reverse biased is not conducting).
Hence, during this positive half cycle we get
an output current (and a output voltage
across the load resistor R L ) as shown in
Fig.14.19(c). In the course of the ac cycle
when the voltage at A becomes negative with
respect to centre tap, the voltage at B would
be positive. In this part of the cycle diode
D 1 would not conduct but diode D 2 would,
giving an output current and output
voltage (across R L ) during the negative half
cycle of the input ac. Thus, we get output
voltage during both the positive as well as
the negative half of the cycle. Obviously,
this is a more efficient circuit for getting
rectified voltage or current than the half-
wave rectifier
The rectified voltage is in the form of
pulses of the shape of half sinusoids.
Though it is unidirectional it does not have
a steady value. To get steady dc output
from the pulsating voltage normally a
capacitor is connected across the output
terminals (parallel to the load R L ). One can
also use an inductor in series with R L for
FIGURE 14.19 (a) A Full-wave rectifier
the same purpose. Since these additional
circuit; (b) Input wave forms given to the
circuits appear to filter out the ac ripple
diode D 1 at A and to the diode D 2 at B;
and give a pure dc voltage, so they are
(c) Output waveform across the
called filters.
load R L connected in the full-wave
Now we shall discuss the role of
rectifier circuit.
capacitor in filtering. When the voltage
across the capacitor is rising, it gets
charged. If there is no external load, it remains charged to the peak voltage
of the rectified output. When there is a load, it gets discharged through
the load and the voltage across it begins to fall. In the next half-cycle of
rectified output it again gets charged to the peak value (Fig. 14.20). The
rate of fall of the voltage across the capacitor depends upon the inverse
product of capacitor C and the effective resistance R L used in the circuit
and is called the time constant. To make the time constant large value of
C should be large. So capacitor input filters use large capacitors. The
output voltage obtained by using capacitor input filter is nearer to the
peak voltage of the rectified voltage. This type of filter is most widely
484
used in power supplies.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
FIGURE 14.20 (a) A full-wave rectifier with capacitor filter, (b) Input and output
voltage of rectifier in (a).
14.8 S PECIAL P URPOSE p-n J UNCTION D IODES
In the section, we shall discuss some devices which are basically junction
diodes but are developed for different applications.
14.8.1 Zener diode
It is a special purpose semiconductor diode, named after its inventor
C. Zener. It is designed to operate under reverse bias in the breakdown
region and used as a voltage regulator. The symbol for Zener diode is
shown in Fig. 14.21(a).
Zener diode is fabricated by heavily doping both p-, and
n- sides of the junction. Due to this, depletion region formed
is very thin (<10 –6 m) and the electric field of the junction is
extremely high (~5×10 6 V/m) even for a small reverse bias
voltage of about 5V. The I-V characteristics of a Zener diode is
shown in Fig. 14.21(b). It is seen that when the applied reverse
bias voltage(V ) reaches the breakdown voltage (V z ) of the Zener
diode, there is a large change in the current. Note that after
the breakdown voltage V z , a large change in the current can
be produced by almost insignificant change in the reverse bias
voltage. In other words, Zener voltage remains constant, even
though current through the Zener diode varies over a wide
range. This property of the Zener diode is used for regulating
supply voltages so that they are constant.
Let us understand how reverse current suddenly increases
at the breakdown voltage. We know that reverse current is
due to the flow of electrons (minority carriers) from p → n and
holes from n → p. As the reverse bias voltage is increased, the
electric field at the junction becomes significant. When the
reverse bias voltage V = V z , then the electric field strength is
high enough to pull valence electrons from the host atoms on
the p-side which are accelerated to n-side. These electrons
account for high current observed at the breakdown. The
FIGURE 14.21 Zener diode,
emission of electrons from the host atoms due to the high
(a) symbol, (b) I-V
electric field is known as internal field emission or field
characteristics.
ionisation. The electric field required for field ionisation is of
485
the order of 10 6 V/m.Physics
Zener diode as a voltage regulator
We know that when the ac input voltage of a rectifier fluctuates, its rectified
output also fluctuates. To get a constant dc voltage from the dc
unregulated output of a rectifier, we use a Zener diode. The circuit diagram
of a voltage regulator using a Zener diode is shown in Fig. 14.22.
The unregulated dc voltage (filtered output of a
rectifier) is connected to the Zener diode through a series
resistance R s such that the Zener diode is reverse biased.
If the input voltage increases, the current through R s
and Zener diode also increases. This increases the
voltage drop across R s without any change in the
voltage across the Zener diode. This is because in the
breakdown region, Zener voltage remains constant even
though the current through the Zener diode changes.
Similarly, if the input voltage decreases, the current
through R s and Zener diode also decreases. The voltage
drop across R s decreases without any change in the
FIGURE 14.22 Zener diode as DC
voltage across the Zener diode. Thus any increase/
voltage regulator
decrease in the input voltage results in, increase/
decrease of the voltage drop across R s without any
change in voltage across the Zener diode. Thus the Zener diode acts as a
voltage regulator. We have to select the Zener diode according to the
required output voltage and accordingly the series resistance R s .
Example 14.5 In a Zener regulated power supply a Zener diode with
V Z = 6.0 V is used for regulation. The load current is to be 4.0 mA and
the unregulated input is 10.0 V. What should be the value of series
resistor R S ?
Solution
The value of R S should be such that the current through the Zener
diode is much larger than the load current. This is to have good load
regulation. Choose Zener current as five times the load current, i.e.,
I Z = 20 mA. The total current through R S is, therefore, 24 mA. The
voltage dr op acr oss R S is 10.0 – 6.0 = 4.0 V. This gives
R S = 4.0V/(24 × 10 –3 ) A = 167 Ω. The nearest value of carbon resistor
is 150 Ω. So, a series resistor of 150 Ω is appropriate. Note that slight
variation in the value of the resistor does not matter, what is important
is that the current I Z should be sufficiently larger than I L .
14.8.2 Optoelectronic junction devices
486
We have seen so far, how a semiconductor diode behaves under applied
electrical inputs. In this section, we learn about semiconductor diodes in
which carriers are generated by photons (photo-excitation). All these
devices are called optoelectronic devices. We shall study the functioning
of the following optoelectronic devices:
(i) Photodiodes used for detecting optical signal (photodetectors).
(ii) Light emitting diodes (LED) which convert electrical energy into light.
(iii) Photovoltaic devices which convert optical radiation into electricity
(solar cells).Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(i) Photodiode
A Photodiode is again a special purpose p-n
junction diode fabricated with a transparent
window to allow light to fall on the diode. It is
operated under reverse bias. When the photodiode
is illuminated with light (photons) with energy (h ν )
greater than the energy gap (E g ) of the
semiconductor, then electron-hole pairs are
generated due to the absorption of photons. The
diode is fabricated such that the generation of
e-h pairs takes place in or near the depletion region
of the diode. Due to electric field of the junction,
electrons and holes are separated before they
recombine. The direction of the electric field is such
that electrons reach n-side and holes reach p-side.
Electrons are collected on n-side and holes are
collected on p-side giving rise to an emf. When an
external load is connected, current flows. The
magnitude of the photocurrent depends on the
intensity of incident light (photocurrent is
proportional to incident light intensity).
It is easier to observe the change in the current
with change in the light intensity, if a reverse bias
is applied. Thus photodiode can be used as a
photodetector to detect optical signals. The circuit
diagram used for the measurement of I-V
characteristics of a photodiode is shown in
Fig. 14.23(a) and a typical I-V characteristics in
Fig. 14.23(b).
FIGURE 14.23 (a) An illuminated
photodiode under reverse bias , (b) I-V
characteristics of a photodiode for different
illumination intensity I 4 > I 3 > I 2 > I 1 .
Example 14.6 The current in the forward bias is known to be more
(~mA) than the current in the reverse bias (~μA). What is the reason
then to operate the photodiodes in reverse bias?
Solution Consider the case of an n-type semiconductor. Obviously,
the majority carrier density (n ) is considerably larger than the
minority hole density p (i.e., n >> p). On illumination, let the excess
electrons and holes generated be ∆n and ∆p, respectively:
p ′ = p + ∆p
Here n ′ and p ′ are the electron and hole concentrations* at any
particular illumination and n and p are carriers concentration when
there is no illumination. Remember ∆n = ∆p and n >> p. Hence, the
* Note that, to create an e-h pair, we spend some energy (photoexcitation, thermal
excitation, etc.). Therefore when an electron and hole recombine the energy is
released in the form of light (radiative recombination) or heat (non-radiative
recombination). It depends on semiconductor and the method of fabrication of
the p-n junction. For the fabrication of LEDs, semiconductors like GaAs, GaAs-
GaP are used in which radiative recombination dominates.
n ′ = n + ∆n
48714.6
Physics
fractional change in the majority carriers (i.e., ∆n/n ) would be much
less than that in the minority carriers (i.e., ∆p/p). In general, we can
state that the fractional change due to the photo-effects on the
minority carrier dominated reverse bias current is more easily
measurable than the fractional change in the forward bias current.
Hence, photodiodes are preferably used in the reverse bias condition
for measuring light intensity.
(ii) Light emitting diode
488
It is a heavily doped p-n junction which under forward bias emits
spontaneous radiation. The diode is encapsulated with a transparent
cover so that emitted light can come out.
When the diode is forward biased, electrons are sent from n → p (where
they are minority carriers) and holes are sent from p → n (where they are
minority carriers). At the junction boundary the concentration of minority
carriers increases compared to the equilibrium concentration (i.e., when
there is no bias). Thus at the junction boundary on either side of the
junction, excess minority carriers are there which recombine with majority
carriers near the junction. On recombination, the energy is released in
the form of photons. Photons with energy equal to or slightly less than
the band gap are emitted. When the forward current of the diode is small,
the intensity of light emitted is small. As the forward current increases,
intensity of light increases and reaches a maximum. Further increase in
the forward current results in decrease of light intensity. LEDs are biased
such that the light emitting efficiency is maximum.
The V-I characteristics of a LED is similar to that of a Si junction
diode. But the threshold voltages are much higher and slightly different
for each colour. The reverse breakdown voltages of LEDs are very low,
typically around 5V. So care should be taken that high reverse voltages
do not appear across them.
LEDs that can emit red, yellow, orange, green and blue light are
commercially available. The semiconductor used for fabrication of visible
LEDs must at least have a band gap of 1.8 eV (spectral range of visible
light is from about 0.4 μm to 0.7 μm, i.e., from about 3 eV to 1.8 eV). The
compound semiconductor Gallium Arsenide – Phosphide (GaAs 1–x P x ) is
used for making LEDs of different colours. GaAs 0.6 P 0.4 (E g ~ 1.9 eV) is
used for red LED. GaAs (E g ~ 1.4 eV) is used for making infrared LED.
These LEDs find extensive use in remote controls, burglar alarm systems,
optical communication, etc. Extensive research is being done for
developing white LEDs which can replace incandescent lamps.
LEDs have the following advantages over conventional incandescent
low power lamps:
(i) Low operational voltage and less power.
(ii) Fast action and no warm-up time required.
(iii) The bandwidth of emitted light is 100 Å to 500 Å or in other words it
is nearly (but not exactly) monochromatic.
(iv) Long life and ruggedness.
(v) Fast on-off switching capability.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(iii) Solar cell
A solar cell is basically a p-n junction which
generates emf when solar radiation falls on the
p-n junction. It works on the same principle
(photovoltaic effect) as the photodiode, except that
no external bias is applied and the junction area
is kept much larger for solar radiation to be
incident because we are interested in more power.
A simple p-n junction solar cell is shown in
Fig. 14.24.
A p-Si wafer of about 300 μm is taken over
which a thin layer (~0.3 μm) of n-Si is grown on
one-side by diffusion process. The other side of
p-Si is coated with a metal (back contact). On the
top of n-Si layer, metal finger electrode (or metallic
FIGURE 14.24 (a) Typical p-n junction
grid) is deposited. This acts as a front contact. The
solar cell; (b) Cross-sectional view.
metallic grid occupies only a very small fraction
of the cell area (<15%) so that light can be incident
on the cell from the top.
The generation of emf by a solar cell, when light falls on, it is due to
the following three basic processes: generation, separation and collection—
(i) generation of e-h pairs due to light (with h ν > E g )
close to the junction; (ii) separation of electrons and
holes due to electric field of the depletion region.
Electrons are swept to n-side and holes to p-side;
(iii) the electrons reaching the n-side are collected by
the front contact and holes reaching p-side are collected
by the back contact. Thus p-side becomes positive and
n-side becomes negative giving rise to photovoltage.
When an external load is connected as shown in
the Fig. 14.25(a) a photocurrent I L flows through the
load. A typical I-V characteristics of a solar cell is shown
in the Fig. 14.25(b).
Note that the I – V characteristics of solar cell is
drawn in the fourth quadrant of the coordinate axes.
This is because a solar cell does not draw current but
supplies the same to the load.
Semiconductors with band gap close to 1.5 eV are
ideal materials for solar cell fabrication. Solar cells are
made with semiconductors like Si (E g = 1.1 eV), GaAs
(E g = 1.43 eV), CdTe (E g = 1.45 eV), CuInSe 2 (E g = 1.04
eV), etc. The important criteria for the selection of a
material for solar cell fabrication are (i) band gap (~1.0
to 1.8 eV), (ii) high optical absorption (~10 4 cm –1 ), (iii)
electrical conductivity, (iv) availability of the raw
FIGURE 14.25 (a) A typical
material, and (v) cost. Note that sunlight is not always
illuminated
p-n junction solar cell;
required for a solar cell. Any light with photon energies
(b) I-V characteristics of a solar cell.
greater than the bandgap will do. Solar cells are used
to power electronic devices in satellites and space
vehicles and also as power supply to some calculators. Production of
low-cost photovoltaic cells for large-scale solar energy is a topic
489
for research.Physics
Example 14.7 Why are Si and GaAs are preferred materials for
solar cells?
Solution The solar radiation spectrum received by us is shown in
Fig. 14.26.
FIGURE 14.26
The maxima is near 1.5 eV. For photo-excitation, h ν > E g . Hence,
semiconductor with band gap ~1.5 eV or lower is likely to give better
solar conversion efficiency. Silicon has E g ~ 1.1 eV while for GaAs it is
~1.53 eV. In fact, GaAs is better (in spite of its higher band gap) than
Si because of its relatively higher absorption coefficient. If we choose
materials like CdS or CdSe (E g ~ 2.4 eV), we can use only the high
energy component of the solar energy for photo-conversion and a
significant part of energy will be of no use.
The question arises: why we do not use material like PbS (E g ~ 0.4 eV)
which satisfy the condition h ν > E g for ν maxima corresponding to the
solar radiation spectra? If we do so, most of the solar radiation will be
absorbed on the top-layer of solar cell and will not reach in or near
the depletion region. For effective electron-hole separation, due to
the junction field, we want the photo-generation to occur in the
junction region only.
14.9 J UNCTION T RANSISTOR
490
The credit of inventing the transistor in the year 1947 goes to J. Bardeen
and W.H. Brattain of Bell Telephone Laboratories, U.S.A. That transistor
was a point-contact transistor. The first junction transistor consisting of
two back-to-back p-n junctions was invented by William Schockley
in 1951.
As long as only the junction transistor was known, it was known
simply as transistor. But over the years new types of transistors were
invented and to differentiate it from the new ones it is now called the
Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT). Even now, often the word transistorSemiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
is used to mean BJT when there is no confusion. Since our study is
limited to only BJT, we shall use the word transistor for BJT without
any ambiguity.
14.9.1 Transistor: structure and action
A transistor has three doped regions forming two p-n junctions
between them. Obviously, there are two types of transistors, as shown
in Fig. 14.27.
(i) n-p-n transistor : Here two segments of n-type semiconductor
(emitter and collector) are separated by a segment of p-type
semiconductor (base).
(ii) p-n-p transistor : Here two segments of p-type semiconductor
(termed as emitter and collector) are separated by a segment of
n-type semiconductor (termed as base).
The schematic representations of an n-p-n and a p-n-p
configuration are shown in Fig. 14.27(a). All the three segments of a
transistor have different thickness and their doping levels are also
different. In the schematic symbols used for representing p-n-p and
n-p-n transistors [Fig. 14.27(b)] the arrowhead shows the direction of
conventional current in the transistor. A brief description of the three
segments of a transistor is given below:
• Emitter : This is the segment on one side of the transistor shown in
Fig. 14.27(a). It is of moderate size and heavily doped. It supplies
a large number of majority carriers for the current flow through
the transistor.
• Base: This is the central segment. It is very thin and lightly doped.
• Collector: This segment collects a major portion of the majority
carriers supplied by the emitter. The collector side is moderately
doped and larger in size as compared to the emitter.
We have seen earlier in the case of a p-n junction, that there is a
formation of depletion region acorss the junction. In case of a transistor
depletion regions are formed at the emitter base-junction and the base-
collector junction. For understanding the action of a transistor, we
have to consider the nature of depletion regions formed at these
junctions. The charge carriers move across different regions of the
transistor when proper voltages are applied across its terminals.
The biasing of the transistor is done differently for different uses.
The transistor can be used in two distinct ways. Basically, it was
invented to function as an amplifier, a device which produces a enlarged
copy of a signal. But later its use as a switch acquired equal
importance. We shall study both these functions and the ways the
transistor is biased to achieve these mutually exclusive functions.
First we shall see what gives the transistor its amplifying capabilities.
The transistor works as an amplifier, with its emitter-base junction
forward biased and the base-collector junction reverse biased. This
situation is shown in Fig. 14.28, where V CC and V EE are used for creating
the respective biasing. When the transistor is biased in this way it is
said to be in active state.We represent the voltage between emitter and
base as V EB and that between the collector and the base as V CB . In
FIGURE 14.27
(a) Schematic
representations of a
n-p-n transistor and
p-n-p transistor, and
(b) Symbols for n-p-n
and p-n-p transistors.
491Physics
Fig. 14.28, base is a common terminal for the two
power supplies whose other terminals are
connected to emitter and collector, respectively. So
the two power supplies are represented as V EE , and
V CC , respectively. In circuits, where emitter is the
common terminal, the power supply between the
base and the emitter is represented as V BB and that
between collector and emitter as V CC .
Let us see now the paths of current carriers in
the transistor with emitter-base junction forward
biased and base-collector junction reverse biased.
The heavily doped emitter has a high concentration
of majority carriers, which will be holes in a p-n-p
transistor and electrons in an n-p-n transistor.
These majority carriers enter the base region in
large numbers. The base is thin and lightly doped.
So the majority carriers there would be few. In a
p-n-p transistor the majority carriers in the base
are electrons since base is of n-type semiconductor.
The large number of holes entering the base from
the emitter swamps the small number of electrons
there. As the base collector-junction is reverse-
biased, these holes, which appear as minority
carriers at the junction, can easily cross the
junction and enter the collector. The holes in the
base could move either towards the base terminal
to combine with the electrons entering from outside
or cross the junction to enter into the collector and
reach the collector terminal. The base is made thin
so that most of the holes find themselves near
the reverse-biased base-collector junction and so
cross the junction instead of moving to the base
FIGURE 14.28 Bias Voltage applied on: (a)
terminal.
p-n-p transistor and (b) n-p-n transistor.
It is interesting to note that due to forward
bias a large current enters the emitter -base
junction, but most of it is diverted to adjacent reverse-biased base-collector
junction and the current coming out of the base becomes a very small
fraction of the current that entered the junction. If we represent the hole
current and the electron current crossing the forward biased junction by
I h and I e respectively then the total current in a forward biased diode is
the sum I h + I e. We see that the emitter current I E = I h + I e but the base
current I B << I h + I e , because a major part of I E goes to collector instead of
coming out of the base terminal. The base current is thus a small fraction
of the emitter current.
The current entering into the emitter from outside is equal to the
emitter current I E . Similarly the current emerging from the base terminal
is I B and that from collector terminal is I C . It is obvious from the above
description and also from a straight forward application of Kirchhoff’s
law to Fig. 14.28(a) that the emitter current is the sum of collector current
492
and base current:Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
I E = I C + I B
(14.7)
We also see that I C ≈ I E .
Our description of the direction of motion of the holes is identical
with the direction of the conventional current. But the direction of motion
of electrons is just opposite to that of the current. Thus in a p-n-p
transistor the current enters from emitter into base whereas in a n-p-n
transistor it enters from the base into the emitter. The arrowhead in the
emitter shows the direction of the conventional current.
The description about the paths followed by the majority and minority
carriers in a n-p-n is exactly the same as that for the p-n-p transistor.
But the current paths are exactly opposite, as shown in Fig. 14.28. In
Fig. 14.28(b) the electrons are the majority carriers supplied by the
n-type emitter region. They cross the thin p-base region and are able to
reach the collector to give the collector current, I C . From the above
description we can conclude that in the active state of the transistor the
emitter-base junction acts as a low resistance while the base collector
acts as a high resistance.
14.9.2 Basic transistor circuit configurations and transistor
characteristics
In a transistor, only three terminals are available, viz., Emitter (E), Base
(B) and Collector (C). Therefore, in a circuit the input/output connections
have to be such that one of these (E, B or C) is common to both the input
and the output. Accordingly, the transistor can be connected in either of
the following three configurations:
Common Emitter (CE), Common Base (CB), Common Collector (CC)
The transistor is most widely used in the CE configuration and we
shall restrict our discussion to only this configuration. Since more
commonly used transistors are n-p-n Si transistors, we shall confine
our discussion to such transistors only. With p-n-p transistors the
polarities of the external power supplies are to be inverted.
Common emitter transistor characteristics
When a transistor is used in CE configuration, the input
is between the base and the emitter and the output is
between the collector and the emitter. The variation of
the base current I B with the base-emitter voltage V BE is
called the input characteristic. Similarly, the variation
of the collector current I C with the collector-emitter
voltage V CE is called the output characteristic. You will
see that the output characteristics are controlled by
the input characteristics. This implies that the collector
current changes with the base current.
The input and the output characteristics of an
n-p-n transistors can be studied by using the circuit
shown in Fig. 14.29.
To study the input characteristics of the transistor
in C E configuration, a curve is plotted between the base
current I B against the base-emitter voltage V BE . The
FIGURE 14.29 Circuit arrangement
for studying the input and output
characteristics of n-p-n transistor in
CE configuration.
493Physics
collector-emitter voltage V CE is kept fixed while
studying the dependence of I B on V BE . We are
interested to obtain the input characteristic
when the transistor is in active state. So the
collector -emitter voltage V CE is kept large
enough to make the base collector junction
reverse biased. Since V CE = V CB + V BE and for Si
transistor V BE is 0.6 to 0.7 V, V CE must be
sufficiently larger than 0.7 V. Since the
transistor is operated as an amplifier over large
range of V CE , the reverse bias across the base-
V BE (V)
collector junction is high most of the time.
Therefore, the input characteristics may be
obtained for V CE somewhere in the range of 3 V
to 20 V. Since the increase in V CE appears as
increase in V CB , its effect on I B is negligible. As
a consequence, input characteristics for various
values of V CE will give almost identical curves.
Hence, it is enough to determine only one input
characteristics. The input characteristics of a
transistor is as shown in Fig. 14.30(a).
The output characteristic is obtained by
observing the variation of I C as V CE is varied
keeping I B constant. It is obvious that if V BE is
increased by a small amount, both hole current
from the emitter region and the electron current
from the base region will increase. As a
consequence both I B and I C will increase
FIGURE 14.30 (a) Typical input
proportionately. This shows that when I B
characteristics, and (b) Typical output
increases I C also increases. The plot of I C versus
characteristics.
V CE for different fixed values of I B gives one
output characteristic. So there will be different output characteristics
corresponding to different values of I B as shown in Fig. 14.30(b).
The linear segments of both the input and output characteristics can
be used to calculate some important ac parameters of transistors as
shown below.
(i) Input resistance (r i ): This is defined as the ratio of change in base-
emitter voltage (∆V BE ) to the resulting change in base current (∆I B ) at
constant collector-emitter voltage (V CE ). This is dynamic (ac resistance)
and as can be seen from the input characteristic, its value varies with
the operating current in the transistor:
I B ( μ A)
 ∆ V BE 
r i = 
 ∆ I B   V
(14.8)
CE
494
The value of r i can be anything from a few hundreds to a few thousand
ohms.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(ii) Output resistance (r o ): This is defined as the ratio of change in
collector-emitter voltage (∆V CE ) to the change in collector current (∆I C )
at a constant base current I B .
 ∆ V 
r o =  CE 
 ∆ I C  I
(14.9)
B
The output characteristics show that initially for very small values of
V CE , I C increases almost linearly. This happens because the base-collector
junction is not reverse biased and the transistor is not in active state. In
fact, the transistor is in the saturation state and the current is controlled
by the supply voltage V CC (=V CE ) in this part of the characteristic. When
V CE is more than that required to reverse bias the base-collector junction,
I C increases very little with V CE . The reciprocal of the slope of the linear
part of the output characteristic gives the values of ro. The output
resistance of the transistor is mainly controlled by the bias of the base-
collector junction. The high magnitude of the output resistance (of the
order of 100 kΩ) is due to the reverse-biased state of this diode. This
also explains why the resistance at the initial part of the characteristic,
when the transistor is in saturation state, is very low.
(iii) Current amplification factor ( β ): This is defined as the ratio of
the change in collector current to the change in base current at a
constant collector-emitter voltage (V CE ) when the transistor is in
active state.
 ∆ I 
β ac =  C 
 ∆ I B  V
(14.10)
CE
This is also known as small signal current gain and its value is very
large.
If we simply find the ratio of I C and I B we get what is called dc β of the
transistor. Hence,
I C
(14.11)
I B
Since I C increases with I B almost linearly and I C = 0 when I B = 0, the values
of both β dc and β ac are nearly equal. So, for most calculations β dc can be
used. Both β ac and β dc vary with V CE and I B (or I C ) slightly.
β dc =
Example 14.8 From the output characteristics shown in Fig. 14.30(b),
calculate the values of β ac and β dc of the transistor when V CE is
10 V and I C = 4.0 mA.
Solution
For determining β ac and β dc at the stated values of V CE and I C one can
proceed as follows. Consider any two characteristics for two values
of I B which lie above and below the given value of I C . Here I C = 4.0 mA.
(Choose characteristics for I B = 30 and 20 μA.) At V CE = 10 V we read
the two values of I C from the graph. Then
 ∆ I C 
I
β = C
 ∆ I B   V CE , dc I B
β ac = 
495Physics
∆I B = (30 – 20) μA = 10 μA, ∆I C = (4.5 – 3.0) mA = 1.5 mA
Therefore, β ac = 1.5 mA/ 10 μA = 150
For determining β dc, either estimate the value of I B corresponding to
I C = 4.0 mA at V CE = 10 V or calculate the two values of β dc for the two
characteristics chosen and find their mean.
Therefore, for I C = 4.5 mA and I B = 30 μA,
β dc = 4.5 mA/ 30 μA = 150
and for I C = 3.0 mA and I B = 20 μA
β dc =3.0 mA / 20 μA = 150
Hence, β dc =(150 + 150) /2 = 150
14.9.3 Transistor as a device
The transistor can be used as a device application depending on the
configuration used (namely CB, CC and CE), the biasing of the E-B and
B-C junction and the operation region namely cutoff, active region and
saturation. As mentioned earlier we have confined only to the CE
configuration and will be concentrating on the biasing and the operation
region to understand the working of a device.
When the transistor is used in the cutoff
or saturation state it acts as a switch. On
the other hand for using the transistor as
an amplifier, it has to operate in the active
region.
(i) Transistor as a switch
We shall try to understand the operation of
the transistor as a switch by analysing the
behaviour of the base-biased transistor in
CE configuration as shown in Fig. 14.31(a).
Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage rule to the
input and output sides of this circuit, we
get
V BB = I B R B + V BE
(14.12)
and
V CE = V CC – I C R C.
(14.13)
We shall treat V BB as the dc input
voltage V i and V CE as the dc output voltage
V O . So, we have
V i = I B R B + V BE and
V o = V CC – I C R C .
Let us see how V o changes as V i
increases from zero onwards. In the case
of Si transistor, as long as input V i is less
than 0.6 V, the transistor will be in cut off
FIGURE 14.31 (a) Base-biased transistor in CE
state and current I C will be zero.
configuration, (b) Transfer characteristic.
Hence V o = V CC
When V i becomes greater than 0.6 V the transistor is in active state with
496
some current I C in the output path and the output V o decrease as theSemiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
term I C R C increases. With increase of V i , I C increases almost linearly
and so V o decreases linearly till its value becomes less than
about 1.0 V.
Beyond this, the change becomes non linear and transistor goes into
saturation state. With further increase in V i the output voltage is found to
decrease further towards zero though it may never become zero. If we plot
the V o vs V i curve, [also called the transfer characteristics of the base-biased
transistor (Fig. 14.31(b)], we see that between cut off state and active state
and also between active state and saturation state there are regions of
non-linearity showing that the transition from cutoff state to active state
and from active state to saturation state are not sharply defined.
Let us see now how the transistor is operated as a switch. As long as
V i is low and unable to forward-bias the transistor, V o is high (at V CC ). If
V i is high enough to drive the transistor into saturation, then V o is low,
very near to zero. When the transistor is not conducting it is said to be
switched off and when it is driven into saturation it is said to be switched
on. This shows that if we define low and high states as below and above
certain voltage levels corresponding to cutoff and saturation of the
transistor, then we can say that a low input switches the transistor off
and a high input switches it on. Alternatively, we can say that a low
input to the transistor gives a high output and a high input gives a low
output. The switching circuits are designed in such a way that the
transistor does not remain in active state.
(ii) Transistor as an amplifier
For using the transistor as an amplifier we will use the active region of
the V o versus V i curve. The slope of the linear part of the curve represents
the rate of change of the output with the input. It is negative because the
output is V CC – I C R C and not I C R C . That is why as input voltage of the CE
amplifier increases its output voltage decreases and the output is said to
be out of phase with the input. If we consider ∆V o and ∆V i as small
changes in the output and input voltages then ∆V o /∆V i is called the small
signal voltage gain A V of the amplifier.
If the V BB voltage has a fixed value corresponding to the mid point of
the active region, the circuit will behave as a CE amplifier with voltage
gain ∆V o / ∆V i . We can express the voltage gain A V in terms of the resistors
in the circuit and the current gain of the transistor as follows.
We have, V o = V CC – I C R C
Therefore, ∆V o = 0 – R C ∆ I C
Similarly, from V i = I B R B + V BE
∆V i = R B ∆I B + ∆V BE
But ∆V BE is negligibly small in comparison to ∆I B R B in this circuit.
So, the voltage gain of this CE amplifier (Fig. 14.32) is given by
A V = – R C ∆ I C / R B ∆I B
= –β ac (R C /R B )
(14.14)
where β ac is equal to ∆ I C /∆I B from Eq. (14.10). Thus the linear
portion of the active region of the transistor can be exploited for the use
in amplifiers. Transistor as an amplifier (CE configuration) is discussed
in detail in the next section.
497Physics
14.9.4 Transistor as an Amplifier (CE-Configuration)
To operate the transistor as an amplifier it is necessary to fix its operating
point somewhere in the middle of its active region. If we fix the value of
V BB corresponding to a point in the middle of the linear part of the transfer
curve then the dc base current I B would be constant and corresponding
collector current I C will also be constant. The dc voltage V CE = V CC - I C R C
would also remain constant. The operating values of V CE and I B determine
the operating point, of the amplifier.
If a small sinusoidal voltage with amplitude v s is superposed on
the dc base bias by connecting the source of that signal in series with the
V BB supply, then the base current will have sinusoidal variations
superimposed on the value of I B . As a consequence the collector current
also will have sinusoidal variations
superimposed on the value of I C, producing
in turn corresponding change in the value
of V O . We can measure the ac variations
across the input and output terminals by
blocking the dc voltages by large capacitors.
In the discription of the amplifier given
above we have not considered any ac signal.
In general, amplifiers are used to amplify
alternating signals. Now let us superimpose
an ac input signal v i (to be amplified) on the
FIGURE 14.32 A simple circuit of a
bias
V BB (dc) as shown in Fig. 14.32. The
CE-transistor amplifier.
output is taken between the collector and
the ground.
The working of an amplifier can be easily understood, if we first
assume that v i = 0. Then applying Kirchhoff’s law to the output loop,
we get
V cc = V CE + I c R L
(14.15)
Likewise, the input loop gives
V BB = V BE + I B R B
When v i is not zero, we get
(14.16)
V BE + v i = V BE + I B R B + ∆I B (R B + r i )
The change in V BE can be related to the input resistance r i [see
Eq. (14.8)] and the change in I B . Hence
v i = ∆I B (R B + r i )
498
= r ∆I B
The change in I B causes a change in I c . We define a parameter β ac ,
which is similar to the β dc defined in Eq. (14.11), as
∆ I
i
β ac = c = c
(14.17)
∆ I B i b
which is also known as the ac current gain A i . Usually β ac is close to β dc
in the linear region of the output characteristics.
The change in I c due to a change in I B causes a change in V CE and the
voltage drop across the resistor R L because V CC is fixed.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
These changes can be given by Eq. (14.15) as
∆V CC = ∆V CE + R L ∆I C = 0
or ∆V CE = –R L ∆I C
The change in V CE is the output voltage v 0 . From Eq. (14.10), we get
v 0 = ∆V CE = –β ac R L ∆I B
The voltage gain of the amplifier is
A v =
v 0
∆ V CE
=
v i
r ∆ I B
= –
β ac R L
(14.18)
r
The negative sign represents that output voltage is opposite with phase
with the input voltage.
From the discussion of the transistor characteristics you have seen
that there is a current gain β ac in the CE configuration. Here we have also
seen the voltage gain A v . Therefore the power gain A p can be expressed
as the product of the current gain and voltage gain. Mathematically
A p = β ac × A v
(14.19)
Since β ac and A v are greater than 1, we get ac power gain. However it
should be realised that transistor is not a power generating device. The
energy for the higher ac power at the output is supplied by the battery.
Example 14.9 In Fig. 14.31(a), the V BB supply can be varied from 0V
to 5.0 V. The Si transistor has β dc = 250 and R B = 100 kΩ, R C = 1 KΩ,
V CC = 5.0V. Assume that when the transistor is saturated, V CE = 0V
and V BE = 0.8V. Calculate (a) the minimum base current, for which
the transistor will reach saturation. Hence, (b) determine V 1 when
the transistor is ‘switched on’. (c) find the ranges of V 1 for which the
transistor is ‘switched off’ and ‘switched on’.
Note that the transistor is in active state when I B varies from 0.0mA
to 20mA. In this range, I C = βI B is valid. In the saturation range,
I C ≤ βI B .
Solution
Given at saturation V CE = 0V, V BE = 0.8V
V CE = V CC – I C R C
I C = V CC /R C = 5.0V/1.0kΩ = 5.0 mA
Therefore I B = I C /β = 5.0 mA/250 = 20μA
The input voltage at which the transistor will go into saturation is
given by
V IH = V BB = I B R B +V BE
= 20μA × 100 kΩ + 0.8V = 2.8V
The value of input voltage below which the transistor remains cutoff
is given by
V IL = 0.6V, V IH = 2.8V
Between 0.0V and 0.6V, the transistor will be in the ‘switched off’
state. Between 2.8V and 5.0V, it will be in ‘switched on’ state.
499Physics
Example 14.10 For a CE transistor amplifier, the audio signal voltage
across the collector resistance of 2.0 kΩ is 2.0 V. Suppose the current
amplification factor of the transistor is 100, What should be the value
of R B in series with V BB supply of 2.0 V if the dc base current has to be
10 times the signal current. Also calculate the dc drop across the
collector resistance. (Refer to Fig. 14.33).
Solution The output ac voltage is 2.0 V. So, the ac collector current
i C = 2.0/2000 = 1.0 mA. The signal current through the base is,
therefore given by i B = i C /β = 1.0 mA/100 = 0.010 mA. The dc base
current has to be 10× 0.010 = 0.10 mA.
From Eq.14.16, R B = (V BB - V BE ) /I B. Assuming V BE = 0.6 V,
R B = (2.0 – 0.6 )/0.10 = 14 kΩ.
The dc collector current I C = 100×0.10 = 10 mA.
14.9.5 Feedback amplifier and transistor oscillator
In an amplifier, we have seen that a sinusoidal input is given which appears
as an amplified signal in the output. This means that an external input is
necessary to sustain ac signal in the
output for an amplifier. In an oscillator, we
get ac output without any external input
signal. In other words, the output in an
oscillator is self-sustained. To attain this,
an amplifier is taken. A portion of the
output power is returned back (feedback)
to the input in phase with the starting
power (this process is termed positive
feedback) as shown in Fig. 14.33(a). The
feedback can be achieved by inductive
coupling (through mutual inductance) or
LC or RC networks. Different types of
oscillators essentially use different methods
of coupling the output to the input
(feedback network), apart from the resonant
circuit for obtaining oscillation at a
particular frequency. For understanding
the oscillator action, we consider the circuit
shown in Fig. 14.33(b) in which the
feedback is accomplished by inductive
coupling from one coil winding (T 1 ) to
another coil winding (T 2 ). Note that the coils
T 2 and T 1 are wound on the same core and
hence are inductively coupled through their
mutual inductance. As in an amplifier, the
base-emitter junction is forward biased
FIGURE 14.33 (a) Principle of a transistor
while the base-collector junction is reverse
amplifier with positive feedback working as an
biased. Detailed biasing circuits actually
oscillator and (b) Tuned collector oscillator, (c) Rise
used have been omitted for simplicity.
and fall (or built up) of current I c and I e due to the
Let us try to understand how oscillations
inductive coupling.
500
are built. Suppose switch S 1 is put on toSemiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
apply proper bias for the first time. Obviously, a surge of collector current
flows in the transistor. This current flows through the coil T 2 where
terminals are numbered 3 and 4 [Fig. 14.33(b)]. This current does not
reach full amplitude instantaneously but increases from X to Y, as shown
in Fig. [14.33(c)(i)]. The inductive coupling between coil T 2 and coil T 1
now causes a current to flow in the emitter circuit (note that this actually
is the ‘feedback’ from input to output). As a result of this positive feedback,
this current (in T 1 ; emitter current) also increases from X ́ to Y ́ [Fig.
14.33(c)(ii)]. The current in T 2 (collector current) connected in the collector
circuit acquires the value Y when the transistor becomes saturated. This
means that maximum collector current is flowing and can increase no
further. Since there is no further change in collector current, the magnetic
field around T 2 ceases to grow. As soon as the field becomes static, there
will be no further feedback from T 2 to T 1 . Without continued feedback,
the emitter current begins to fall. Consequently, collector current decreases
from Y towards Z [Fig. 14.33(c)(i)]. However, a decrease of collector current
causes the magnetic field to decay around the coil T 2 . Thus, T 1 is now
seeing a decaying field in T 2 (opposite from what it saw when the field was
growing at the initial start operation). This causes a further decrease in
the emitter current till it reaches Z′when the transistor is cut-off. This
means that both I E and I C cease to flow. Therefore, the transistor has
reverted back to its original state (when the power was first switched on).
The whole process now repeats itself. That is, the transistor is driven to
saturation, then to cut-off, and then back to saturation. The time for
change from saturation to cut-off and back is determined by the constants
of the tank circuit or tuned circuit (inductance L of coil T 2 and C connected
in parallel to it). The resonance frequency ( ν ) of this tuned circuit
determines the frequency at which the oscillator will oscillate.

1

(14.20)

2 π LC 
In the circuit of Fig. 14.33(b), the tank or tuned circuit is connected
in the collector side. Hence, it is known as tuned collector oscillator. If the
tuned circuit is on the base side, it will be known as tuned base oscillator.
There are many other types of tank circuits (say RC) or feedback circuits
giving different types of oscillators like Colpitt’s oscillator, Hartley
oscillator, RC-oscillator.
ν =

14.10 D IGITAL E LECTRONICS
AND
L OGIC G ATES
In electronics circuits like amplifiers, oscillators, introduced to you in
earlier sections, the signal (current or voltage) has been in the form of
continuous, time-varying voltage or current. Such signals are called
continuous or analogue signals. A typical analogue signal is shown in
Figure. 14.34(a). Fig. 14.34(b) shows a pulse waveform in which only
discrete values of voltages are possible. It is convenient to use binary
numbers to represent such signals. A binary number has only two digits
‘0’ (say, 0V) and ‘1’ (say, 5V). In digital electronics we use only these two
levels of voltage as shown in Fig. 14.34(b). Such signals are called Digital
Signals. In digital circuits only two values (represented by 0 or 1) of the
input and output voltage are permissible.
501Physics
This section is intended to provide the first step in our understanding
of digital electronics. We shall restrict our study to some basic building
blocks of digital electronics (called Logic Gates) which process the digital
signals in a specific manner. Logic gates are used in calculators, digital
watches, computers, robots, industrial control systems, and in
telecommunications.
A light switch in your house can be used as an example of a digital
circuit. The light is either ON or OFF depending on the switch position.
When the light is ON, the output value is ‘1’. When the light is OFF the
output value is ‘0’. The inputs are the position of the light switch. The
switch is placed either in the ON or OFF position to activate the light.
FIGURE 14.34 (a) Analogue signal, (b) Digital signal.
14.10.1 Logic gates
Input Output
A Y
0 1
1 0
(b)
FIGURE 14.35
(a) Logic symbol,
(b) Truth table of
NOT gate.
502
A gate is a digital circuit that follows curtain logical relationship
between the input and output voltages. Therefore, they are generally
known as logic gates — gates because they control the flow of
information. The five common logic gates used are NOT, AND, OR,
NAND, NOR. Each logic gate is indicated by a symbol and its function
is defined by a truth table that shows all the possible input logic level
combinations with their respective output logic levels. Truth tables
help understand the behaviour of logic gates. These logic gates can
be realised using semiconductor devices.
(i) NOT gate
This is the most basic gate, with one input and one output. It produces
a ‘1’ output if the input is ‘0’ and vice-versa. That is, it produces an
inverted version of the input at its output. This is why it is also known
as an inverter. The commonly used symbol together with the truth
table for this gate is given in Fig. 14.35.
(ii) OR Gate
An OR gate has two or more inputs with one output. The logic symbol
and truth table are shown in Fig. 14.36. The output Y is 1 when either
input A or input B or both are 1s, that is, if any of the input is high, the
output is high.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Input
Output
A B Y
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 1
(b)
FIGURE 14.36 (a) Logic symbol (b) Truth table of OR gate.
Apart from carrying out the above mathematical logic operation, this
gate can be used for modifying the pulse waveform as explained in the
following example.
Example 14.11 Justify the output waveform (Y) of the OR gate for
the following inputs A and B given in Fig. 14.37.
Solution Note the following:
• At t < t 1 ;
A = 0, B = 0;
Hence Y = 0
• For t 1 to t 2 ; A = 1, B = 0;
Hence Y = 1
• For t 2 to t 3 ; A = 1, B = 1;
Hence Y = 1
• For t 3 to t 4 ; A = 0, B = 1;
Hence Y = 1
• For t 4 to t 5 ; A = 0, B = 0;
Hence Y = 0
• For t 5 to t 6 ; A = 1, B = 0;
Hence Y = 1
• For t > t 6 ; A = 0, B = 1;
Hence Y = 1
Therefore the waveform Y will be as shown in the Fig. 14.37.
(iii) AND Gate
An AND gate has two or more inputs and one output. The output Y of
AND gate is 1 only when input A and input B are both 1. The logic
symbol and truth table for this gate are given in Fig. 14.38
FIGURE 14.38 (a) Logic symbol, (b) Truth table of AND gate.
FIGURE 14.37
Input
Output
A B Y
0 0 0
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 1
(b)
503Physics
Example 14.12 Take A and B input waveforms similar to that in
Example 14.11. Sketch the output waveform obtained from AND gate.
Solution
• For t ≤ t 1 ;
A = 0, B = 0;
• For t 1 to t 2 ;
A = 1, B = 0;
• For t 2 to t 3 ;
A = 1, B = 1;
• For t 3 to t 4 ;
A = 0, B = 1;
• For t 4 to t 5 ;
A = 0, B = 0;
• For t 5 to t 6 ;
A = 1, B = 0;
• For t > t 6 ;
A = 0, B = 1;
Based on the above, the output waveform for AND gate
as given below.
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
can be drawn
FIGURE 14.39
(iv) NAND Gate
This is an AND gate followed by a NOT gate. If inputs A and B are both
‘1’, the output Y is not ‘1’. The gate gets its name from this NOT AND
behaviour. Figure 14.40 shows the symbol and truth table of NAND gate.
NAND gates are also called Universal Gates since by using these
gates you can realise other basic gates like OR, AND and NOT (Exercises
14.16 and 14.17).
Input
Output
A B Y
0 0 1
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0
(b)
504
FIGURE 14.40 (a) Logic symbol, (b) Truth table of NAND gate.
Example 14.13 Sketch the output Y from a NAND gate having inputs
A and B given below:
Solution
• For t < t 1 ;
• For t 1 to t 2 ;
• For t 2 to t 3 ;
• For t 3 to t 4 ;
A
A
A
A
=
=
=
=
1,
0,
0,
1,
B
B
B
B
=
=
=
=
1;
0;
1;
0;
Hence
Hence
Hence
Hence
Y
Y
Y
Y
=
=
=
=
0
1
1
1Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
• For t 4 to t 5 ;
• For t 5 to t 6 ;
• For t > t 6 ;
A = 1, B = 1;
A = 0, B = 0;
A = 0, B = 1;
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 1
FIGURE 14.41
(v) NOR Gate
It has two or more inputs and one output. A NOT- operation applied
after OR gate gives a NOT-OR gate (or simply NOR gate). Its output Y is
‘1’ only when both inputs A and B are ‘0’, i.e., neither one input nor the
other is ‘1’. The symbol and truth table for NOR gate is given in
Fig. 14.42.
Input
Output
A B Y
0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
(b)
FIGURE 14.42 (a) Logic symbol, (b) Truth table of NOR gate.
NOR gates are considered as universal gates because you can obtain
all the gates like AND, OR, NOT by using only NOR gates (Exercises 14.18
and 14.19).
14.11 I NTEGRATED C IRCUITS
The conventional method of making circuits is to choose components
like diodes, transistor, R, L, C etc., and connect them by soldering wires
in the desired manner. Inspite of the miniaturisation introduced by the
discovery of transistors, such circuits were still bulky. Apart from this,
such circuits were less reliable and less shock proof. The concept of
fabricating an entire circuit (consisting of many passive components like
R and C and active devices like diode and transistor) on a small single
block (or chip) of a semiconductor has revolutionised the electronics
technology. Such a circuit is known as Integrated Circuit (IC). The most
widely used technology is the Monolithic Integrated Circuit. The word
505Physics
monolithic is a combination of two greek words, monos
means single and lithos means stone. This, in effect,
means that the entire circuit is formed on a single
silicon crystal (or chip). The chip dimensions are as
small as 1mm × 1mm or it could even be smaller. Figure
14.43 shows a chip in its protective plastic case, partly
removed to reveal the connections coming out from the
‘chip’ to the pins that enable it to make external
connections.
FIGURE 14.43 The casing and
Depending on nature of input signals, IC’s can be
connection of a ‘chip’.
grouped in two categories: (a) linear or analogue IC’s
and (b) digital IC’s. The linear IC’s process analogue
signals which change smoothly and continuously over a range of values
between a maximum and a minimum. The output is more or less directly
proportional to the input, i.e., it varies linearly with the input. One of the
most useful linear IC’s is the operational amplifier.
The digital IC’s process signals that have only two values. They
contain circuits such as logic gates. Depending upon the level of
integration (i.e., the number of circuit components or logic gates), the ICs
are termed as Small Scale Integration, SSI (logic gates < 10); Medium
Scale Integration, MSI (logic gates < 100); Large Scale Integration, LSI
(logic gates < 1000); and Very Large Scale Integration, VLSI (logic gates >
1000). The technology of fabrication is very involved but large scale
industrial production has made them very inexpensive.
F ASTER
AND SMALLER : THE FUTURE OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
The Integrated Chip (IC) is at the heart of all computer systems. In fact ICs are found in
almost all electrical devices like cars, televisions, CD players, cell phones etc. The
miniaturisation that made the modern personal computer possible could never have
happened without the IC. ICs are electronic devices that contain many transistors, resistors,
capacitors, connecting wires – all in one package. You must have heard of the
microprocessor. The microprocessor is an IC that processes all information in a computer,
like keeping track of what keys are pressed, running programmes, games etc. The IC was
first invented by Jack Kilky at Texas Instruments in 1958 and he was awarded Nobel Prize
for this in 2000. ICs are produced on a piece of semiconductor crystal (or chip) by a process
called photolithography. Thus, the entire Information Technology (IT) industry hinges on
semiconductors. Over the years, the complexity of ICs has increased while the size of its
features continued to shrink. In the past five decades, a dramatic miniaturisation in
computer technology has made modern day computers faster and smaller. In the 1970s,
Gordon Moore, co-founder of INTEL, pointed out that the memory capacity of a chip (IC)
approximately doubled every one and a half years. This is popularly known as Moore’s
law. The number of transistors per chip has risen exponentially and each year computers
are becoming more powerful, yet cheaper than the year before. It is intimated from current
trends that the computers available in 2020 will operate at 40 GHz (40,000 MHz) and
would be much smaller, more efficient and less expensive than present day computers.
The explosive growth in the semiconductor industry and computer technology is best
expressed by a famous quote from Gordon Moore: “If the auto industry advanced as rapidly
as the semiconductor industry, a Rolls Royce would get half a million miles per gallon, and
it would be cheaper to throw it away than to park it”.
506Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
SUMMARY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
Semiconductors are the basic materials used in the present solid state
electronic devices like diode, transistor, ICs, etc.
Lattice structure and the atomic structure of constituent elements
decide whether a particular material will be insulator, metal or
semiconductor.
Metals have low resistivity (10 –2 to 10 –8 Ω m), insulators have very high
resistivity (>10 8 Ω m –1 ), while semiconductors have intermediate values
of resistivity.
Semiconductors are elemental (Si, Ge) as well as compound (GaAs,
CdS, etc.).
Pure semiconductors are called ‘intrinsic semiconductors’. The presence
of charge carriers (electrons and holes) is an ‘intrinsic’ property of the
material and these are obtained as a result of thermal excitation. The
number of electrons (n e ) is equal to the number of holes (n h ) in intrinsic
conductors. Holes are essentially electron vacancies with an effective
positive charge.
The number of charge carriers can be changed by ‘doping’ of a suitable
impurity in pure semiconductors. Such semiconductors are known as
extrinsic semiconductors. These are of two types (n-type and p-type).
In n-type semiconductors, n e >> n h while in p-type semiconductors n h >> n e .
n-type semiconducting Si or Ge is obtained by doping with pentavalent
atoms (donors) like As, Sb, P, etc., while p-type Si or Ge can be obtained
by doping with trivalent atom (acceptors) like B, Al, In etc.
n e n h = n i 2 in all cases. Further, the material possesses an overall charge
neutrality.
There are two distinct band of energies (called valence band and
conduction band) in which the electrons in a material lie. Valence
band energies are low as compared to conduction band energies. All
energy levels in the valence band are filled while energy levels in the
conduction band may be fully empty or partially filled. The electrons in
the conduction band are free to move in a solid and are responsible for
the conductivity. The extent of conductivity depends upon the energy
gap (E g ) between the top of valence band (E V ) and the bottom of the
conduction band E C . The electrons from valence band can be excited by
heat, light or electrical energy to the conduction band and thus, produce
a change in the current flowing in a semiconductor.
For insulators E g > 3 eV, for semiconductors E g is 0.2 eV to 3 eV, while
for metals E g ≈ 0.
p-n junction is the ‘key’ to all semiconductor devices. When such a
junction is made, a ‘depletion layer’ is formed consisting of immobile
ion-cores devoid of their electrons or holes. This is responsible for a
junction potential barrier.
By changing the external applied voltage, junction barriers can be
changed. In forward bias (n-side is connected to negative terminal of the
battery and p-side is connected to the positive), the barrier is decreased
while the barrier increases in reverse bias. Hence, forward bias current
is more (mA) while it is very small (μA) in a p-n junction diode.
Diodes can be used for rectifying an ac voltage (restricting the ac voltage
to one direction). With the help of a capacitor or a suitable filter, a dc
voltage can be obtained.
There are some special purpose diodes.
507Physics
16. Zener diode is one such special purpose diode. In reverse bias, after a
certain voltage, the current suddenly increases (breakdown voltage) in
a Zener diode. This property has been used to obtain voltage regulation.
17. p-n junctions have also been used to obtain many photonic or
optoelectronic devices where one of the participating entity is ‘photon’:
(a) Photodiodes in which photon excitation results in a change of reverse
saturation current which helps us to measure light intensity; (b) Solar
cells which convert photon energy into electricity; (c) Light Emitting
Diode and Diode Laser in which electron excitation by a bias voltage
results in the generation of light.
18. Transistor is an n-p-n or p-n-p junction device. The central block
(thin and lightly doped) is called ‘Base’ while the other electrodes are
‘Emitter’ and ‘Collectors’. The emitter-base junction is forward biased
while collector -base junction is reverse biased.
19. The transistors can be connected in such a manner that either C or E
or B is common to both the input and output. This gives the three
configurations in which a transistor is used: Common Emitter (CE),
Common Collector (CC) and Common Base (CB). The plot between I C
and V CE for fixed I B is called output characteristics while the plot between
I B and V BE with fixed V CE is called input characteristics. The important
transistor parameters for CE-configuration are:
 ∆ V

BE
input resistance, r i = 
 ∆ I B   V
CE
 ∆ V CE 
output resistance, r o = 
 ∆ I  
C
I B
 ∆ I 
current amplification factor, β =  C 
 ∆ I B  V CE
20. Transistor can be used as an amplifier and oscillator. In fact, an
oscillator can also be considered as a self-sustained amplifier in which
a part of output is fed-back to the input in the same phase (positive
feed back). The voltage gain of a transistor amplifier in common emitter
21.
22.
23.
24.
 v 
R
configuration is: A v =  o  = β C , where R C and R B are respectively
v
R
 i 
B
the resistances in collector and base sides of the circuit.
When the transistor is used in the cutoff or saturation state, it acts as
a switch.
There are some special circuits which handle the digital data consisting
of 0 and 1 levels. This forms the subject of Digital Electronics.
The important digital circuits performing special logic operations are
called logic gates. These are: OR, AND, NOT, NAND, and NOR gates.
In modern day circuit, many logical gates or circuits are integrated in
one single ‘Chip’. These are known as Intgrated circuits (IC).
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
508
The energy bands (E C or E V ) in the semiconductors are space delocalised
which means that these are not located in any specific place inside the
solid. The energies are the overall averages. When you see a picture in
which E C or E V are drawn as straight lines, then they should be
respectively taken simply as the bottom of conduction band energy levels
and top of valence band energy levels.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
2.
3.
4.
5.
In elemental semiconductors (Si or Ge), the n-type or p-type
semiconductors are obtained by introducing ‘dopants’ as defects. In
compound semiconductors, the change in relative stoichiometric ratio
can also change the type of semiconductor. For example, in ideal GaAs
the ratio of Ga:As is 1:1 but in Ga-rich or As-rich GaAs it could
respectively be Ga 1.1 As 0.9 or Ga 0.9 As 1.1 . In general, the presence of
defects control the properties of semiconductors in many ways.
In transistors, the base region is both narrow and lightly doped,
otherwise the electrons or holes coming from the input side (say, emitter
in CE-configuration) will not be able to reach the collector.
We have described an oscillator as a positive feedback amplifier. For
stable oscillations, the voltage feedback (V fb ) from the output voltage
(V o ) should be such that after amplification (A) it should again become
V o . If a fraction β′ is feedback, then V fb = V o . β′ and after amplification
its value A(v o .β′) should be equal to V o . This means that the criteria for
stable oscillations to be sustained is A β′ = 1. This is known as
Barkhausen's Criteria.
In an oscillator, the feedback is in the same phase (positive feedback).
If the feedback voltage is in opposite phase (negative feedback), the
gain is less than 1 and it can never work as oscillator. It will be an
amplifier with reduced gain. However, the negative feedback also reduces
noise and distortion in an amplifier which is an advantageous feature.
EXERCISES
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
In an n-type silicon, which of the following statement is true:
(a) Electrons are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the
dopants.
(b) Electrons are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.
(c) Holes are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.
(d) Holes are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the dopants.
Which of the statements given in Exercise 14.1 is true for p-type
semiconductos.
Carbon, silicon and germanium have four valence electrons each.
These are characterised by valence and conduction bands separated
by energy band gap respectively equal to (E g ) C , (E g ) Si and (E g ) Ge . Which
of the following statements is true?
(a) (E g ) Si < (E g ) Ge < (E g ) C
(b) (E g ) C < (E g ) Ge > (E g ) Si
(c) (E g ) C > (E g ) Si > (E g ) Ge
(d) (E g ) C = (E g ) Si = (E g ) Ge
In an unbiased p-n junction, holes diffuse from the p-region to
n-region because
(a) free electrons in the n-region attract them.
(b) they move across the junction by the potential difference.
(c) hole concentration in p-region is more as compared to n-region.
(d) All the above.
509Physics
When a forward bias is applied to a p-n junction, it
(a) raises the potential barrier.
(b) reduces the majority carrier current to zero.
(c) lowers the potential barrier.
(d) None of the above.
14.6 For transistor action, which of the following statements are correct:
(a) Base, emitter and collector regions should have similar size and
doping concentrations.
(b) The base region must be very thin and lightly doped.
(c) The emitter junction is forward biased and collector junction is
reverse biased.
(d) Both the emitter junction as well as the collector junction are
forward biased.
14.7 For a transistor amplifier, the voltage gain
(a) remains constant for all frequencies.
(b) is high at high and low frequencies and constant in the middle
frequency range.
(c) is low at high and low frequencies and constant at mid
frequencies.
(d) None of the above.
14.8 In half-wave rectification, what is the output frequency if the input
frequency is 50 Hz. What is the output frequency of a full-wave rectifier
for the same input frequency.
14.9 For a CE-transistor amplifier, the audio signal voltage across the
collected resistance of 2 kΩ is 2 V. Suppose the current amplification
factor of the transistor is 100, find the input signal voltage and base
current, if the base resistance is 1 kΩ.
14.10 Two amplifiers are connected one after the other in series (cascaded).
The first amplifier has a voltage gain of 10 and the second has a
voltage gain of 20. If the input signal is 0.01 volt, calculate the output
ac signal.
14.11 A p-n photodiode is fabricated from a semiconductor with band gap
of 2.8 eV. Can it detect a wavelength of 6000 nm?
14.5
ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
14.12 The number of silicon atoms per m 3 is 5 × 10 28 . This is doped
simultaneously with 5 × 10 22 atoms per m 3 of Arsenic and 5 × 10 20
per m 3 atoms of Indium. Calculate the number of electrons and holes.
Given that n i = 1.5 × 10 16 m –3 . Is the material n-type or p-type?
14.13 In an intrinsic semiconductor the energy gap E g is 1.2eV. Its hole
mobility is much smaller than electron mobility and independent of
temperature. What is the ratio between conductivity at 600K and
that at 300K? Assume that the temperature dependence of intrinsic
carrier concentration n i is given by
510
E g 

n i = n 0 exp  –
 2 k B T  
where n 0 is a constant.Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
14.14 In a p-n junction diode, the current I can be expressed as
 eV

I = I 0 exp 
– 1 
 2 k B T

where I 0 is called the reverse saturation current, V is the voltage
across the diode and is positive for forward bias and negative for
reverse bias, and I is the current through the diode, k B is the
Boltzmann constant (8.6×10 –5 eV/K) and T is the absolute
temperature. If for a given diode I 0 = 5 × 10 –12 A and T = 300 K, then
(a) What will be the forward current at a forward voltage of 0.6 V?
(b) What will be the increase in the current if the voltage across the
diode is increased to 0.7 V?
(c) What is the dynamic resistance?
(d) What will be the current if reverse bias voltage changes from 1 V
to 2 V?
14.15 You are given the two circuits as shown in Fig. 14.44. Show that
circuit (a) acts as OR gate while the circuit (b) acts as AND gate.
FIGURE 14.44
14.16 Write the truth table for a NAND gate connected as given in
Fig. 14.45.
FIGURE 14.45
Hence identify the exact logic operation carried out by this circuit.
14.17 You are given two circuits as shown in Fig. 14.46, which consist
of NAND gates. Identify the logic operation carried out by the two
circuits.
FIGURE 14.46
14.18 Write the truth table for circuit given in Fig. 14.47 below consisting
of NOR gates and identify the logic operation (OR, AND, NOT) which
this circuit is performing.
511Physics
FIGURE 14.47
(Hint: A = 0, B = 1 then A and B inputs of second NOR gate will be 0
and hence Y=1. Similarly work out the values of Y for other
combinations of A and B. Compare with the truth table of OR, AND,
NOT gates and find the correct one.)
14.19 Write the truth table for the circuits given in Fig. 14.48 consisting of
NOR gates only. Identify the logic operations (OR, AND, NOT) performed
by the two circuits.
FIGURE 14.48
512
Chapter Fifteen
COMMUNICATION
SYSTEMS
15.1 I NTRODUCTION
Communication is the act of transmission of information. Every living
creature in the world experiences the need to impart or receive information
almost continuously with others in the surrounding world. For
communication to be successful, it is essential that the sender and the
receiver understand a common language. Man has constantly made
endeavors to improve the quality of communication with other human
beings. Languages and methods used in communication have kept
evolving from prehistoric to modern times, to meet the growing demands
in terms of speed and complexity of information. It would be worthwhile
to look at the major milestones in events that promoted developments in
communications, as presented in Table 15.1.
Modern communication has its roots in the 19 th and 20 th century in
the work of scientists like J.C. Bose, F.B. Morse, G. Marconi and Alexander
Graham Bell. The pace of development seems to have increased
dramatically after the first half of the 20 th century. We can hope to see
many more accomplishments in the coming decades. The aim of this
chapter is to introduce the concepts of communication, namely the mode
of communication, the need for modulation, production and deduction
of amplitude modulation.
15.2 E LEMENTS
OF A
C OMMUNICATION S YSTEM
Communication pervades all stages of life of all living creatures. Irrespective
of its nature, every communication system has three essential elements-Physics
T ABLE 15.1 S OME MAJOR MILESTONES IN THE HISTORY OF COMMUNICATION
Year Event Remarks
Around
1565 A.D. The reporting of the delivery of
a child by queen using drum
beats from a distant place to
King Akbar. It is believed that minister Birbal
experimented with the arrangement to
decide the number of drummers posted
between the place where the queen
stayed and the place where the king
stayed.
1835 Invention of telegraph by
Samuel F.B. Morse and Sir
Charles Wheatstone It resulted in tremendous growth of
messages through post offices and
reduced physical travel of messengers
considerably.
1876 Telephone invented by
Alexander Graham Bell and
Antonio Meucci Perhaps the most widely used means of
communication in the history of
mankind.
1895 Jagadis Chandra Bose and
Guglielmo
Marconi
demonstrated
wireless
telegraphy. It meant a giant leap – from an era of
communication using wires
to
communicating without using wires.
(wireless)
1936 Television broadcast(John
Logi Baird) First television broadcast by BBC
1955 First radio FAX transmitted
across continent.(Alexander
Bain) The idea of FAX transmission was
patented by Alexander Bain in 1843.
1968 ARPANET- the first internet
came into existence(J.C.R.
Licklider) ARPANET was a project undertaken by
the U.S. defence department. It allowed
file transfer from one computer to
another connected to the network.
1975 Fiber optics developed at Bell
Laboratories Fiber optical systems are superior and
more economical compared to
traditional communication systems.
1989-91 Tim Berners-Lee invented the
World Wide Web. WWW may be regarded as the mammoth
encyclopedia of knowledge accessible to
everyone round the clock throughout the
year.
514Communication System
transmitter, medium/channel and receiver. The block diagram shown in
Fig. 15.1 depicts the general form of a communication system.
FIGURE 15.1 Block diagram of a generalised communication system.
In a communication system, the transmitter is located at one place,
the receiver is located at some other place (far or near) separate from the
transmitter and the channel is the physical medium that connects them.
Depending upon the type of communication system, a channel may be in
the form of wires or cables connecting the transmitter and the receiver or
it may be wireless. The purpose of the transmitter is to convert the message
signal produced by the source of information into a form suitable for
transmission through the channel. If the output of the information source
is a non-electrical signal like a voice signal, a transducer converts it to
electrical form before giving it as an input to the transmitter. When a
transmitted signal propagates along the channel it may get distorted due
to channel imperfection. Moreover, noise adds to the transmitted signal
and the receiver receives a corrupted version of the transmitted signal.
The receiver has the task of operating on the received signal. It reconstructs
a recognisable form of the original message signal for delivering it to the
user of information.
There are two basic modes of communication: point-to-point and
broadcast.
In point-to-point communication mode, communication takes place
over a link between a single transmitter and a receiver. Telephony is an
example of such a mode of communication. In contrast, in the broadcast
mode, there are a large number of receivers corresponding to a single
transmitter. Radio and television are examples of broadcast mode of
communication.
15.3 B ASIC T ERMINOLOGY U SED
C OMMUNICATION S YSTEMS
IN
E LECTRONIC
By now, we have become familiar with some terms like information source,
transmitter, receiver, channel, noise, etc. It would be easy to understand
the principles underlying any communication, if we get ourselves
acquainted with the following basic terminology.
515Physics
516
Jagadis Chandra Bose
(1858 – 1937) He
developed an apparatus
for generating ultrashort
electro-magnetic waves
and studied their quasi-
optical properties. He
was said to be the first to
employ a semiconductor
like galena as a self-
recovering detector of
electromagnetic waves.
Bose published three
papers in the British
magazine,
‘The
Electrician’ of 27 Dec.
1895. His invention was
published
in
the
‘Proceedings of The Royal
Society’ on 27 April 1899
over two years before
Marconi’s first wireless
communication on 13
December 1901. Bose
also invented highly
sensitive instruments for
the detection of minute
responses by living
organisms to external
stimulii and established
parallelism
between
animal
and
plant
tissues.
(i) Transducer: Any device that converts one form of
energy into another can be termed as a transducer.
In electronic communication systems, we usually
come across devices that have either their inputs
or outputs in the electrical form. An electrical
transducer may be defined as a device that converts
some physical variable (pressure, displacement,
force, temperature, etc) into corresponding
variations in the electrical signal at its output.
(ii) Signal: Information converted in electrical form
and suitable for transmission is called a signal.
Signals can be either analog or digital. Analog
signals are continuous variations of voltage or
current. They are essentially single-valued
functions of time. Sine wave is a fundamental
analog signal. All other analog signals can be fully
understood in terms of their sine wave components.
Sound and picture signals in TV are analog in
nature. Digital signals are those which can take
only discrete stepwise values. Binary system that
is extensively used in digital electronics employs
just two levels of a signal. ‘0’ corresponds to a low
level and ‘1’ corresponds to a high level of voltage/
current. There are several coding schemes useful
for digital communication. They employ suitable
combinations of number systems such as the
binary coded decimal (BCD)*. American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)** is a
universally popular digital code to represent
numbers, letters and certain characters.
(iii) Noise: Noise refers to the unwanted signals that
tend to disturb the transmission and processing
of message signals in a communication system.
The source generating the noise may be located
inside or outside the system.
(iv) Transmitter: A transmitter processes the incoming
message signal so as to make it suitable for
transmission through a channel and subsequent
reception.
(v) Receiver: A receiver extracts the desired message
signals from the received signals at the channel
output.
(vi) Attenuation: The loss of strength of a signal while
propagating through a medium is known as
attenuation.
* In BCD, a digit is usually represented by four binary (0 or 1) bits. For example
the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 in the decimal system are written as 0000, 0001, 0010,
0011 and 0100. 1000 would represent eight.
** It is a character encoding in terms of numbers based on English alphabet since
the computer can only understand numbers.Communication System
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
Amplification: It is the process of increasing the amplitude (and
consequently the strength) of a signal using an electronic circuit
called the amplifier (reference Chapter 14). Amplification is
necessary to compensate for the attenuation of the signal in
communication systems. The energy needed for additional signal
strength is obtained from a DC power source. Amplification is
done at a place between the source and the destination wherever
signal strength becomes weaker than the required strength.
Range: It is the largest distance between a source and a destination
up to which the signal is received with sufficient strength.
Bandwidth: Bandwidth refers to the frequency range over which
an equipment operates or the portion of the spectrum occupied
by the signal.
Modulation: The original low frequency message/information
signal cannot be transmitted to long distances because of
reasons given in Section 15.7. Therefore, at the transmitter,
information contained in the low frequency message signal is
superimposed on a high frequency wave, which acts as a carrier
of the information. This process is known as modulation. As
will be explained later, there are several types of modulation,
abbreviated as AM, FM and PM.
Demodulation: The process of retrieval of information from the
carrier wave at the receiver is termed demodulation. This is the
reverse process of modulation.
Repeater: A repeater is a combination of a receiver and a
transmitter. A repeater, picks up the signal from the transmitter,
amplifies and retransmits it to the receiver sometimes with a
change in carrier frequency. Repeaters are used to extend the
range of a communication system as shown in Fig. 15.2. A
communication satellite is essentially a repeater station in space.
FIGURE 15.2 Use of repeater station to increase the range of communication.
15.4 B ANDWIDTH
OF
S IGNALS
In a communication system, the message signal can be voice, music,
picture or computer data. Each of these signals has different ranges of
frequencies. The type of communication system needed for a given signal
depends on the band of frequencies which is considered essential for the
communication process.
For speech signals, frequency range 300 Hz to 3100 Hz is considered
adequate. Therefore speech signal requires a bandwidth of 2800 Hz (3100 Hz
– 300 Hz) for commercial telephonic communication. To transmit music,
517Physics
an approximate bandwidth of 20 kHz is required because of the high
frequencies produced by the musical instruments. The audible range of
frequencies extends from 20 Hz to 20 kHz.
Video signals for transmission of pictures require about 4.2 MHz of
bandwidth. A TV signal contains both voice and picture and is usually
allocated 6 MHz of bandwidth for transmission.
In the preceeding paragraph, we have considered only analog signals.
Digital signals are in the form of rectangular waves as shown in Fig. 15.3.
One can show that this rectangular wave can be decomposed into a
superposition of sinusoidal waves of frequencies ν 0 , 2 ν 0 , 3 ν 0 , 4 ν 0 ... n ν 0
where n is an integer extending to infinity and ν 0 = 1/T 0 . The fundamental
( ν 0 ), fundamental ( ν 0 ) + second harmonic (2 ν 0 ), and fundamental ( ν 0 ) +
second harmonic (2 ν 0 ) +
third harmonic (3 ν 0 ), are
shown in the same figure to
illustrate this fact. It is clear
that to reproduce the
rectangular wave shape
exactly we need to
superimpose all the
harmonics ν 0 , 2 ν 0 , 3 ν 0 ,
4 ν 0 ..., which implies an
infinite
bandwidth.
However, for practical
purposes, the contribution
from higher harmonics can
be neglected, thus limiting
FIGURE 15.3 Approximation of a rectangular wave in terms of a
the bandwidth. As a result,
fundamental sine wave and its harmonics.
received waves are a
distorted version of the
transmitted one. If the bandwidth is large enough to accommodate a few
harmonics, the information is not lost and the rectangular signal is more
or less recovered. This is so because the higher the harmonic, less is its
contribution to the wave form.
15.5 B ANDWIDTH
518
OF
T RANSMISSION M EDIUM
Similar to message signals, different types of transmission media offer
different bandwidths. The commonly used transmission media are wire,
free space and fiber optic cable. Coaxial cable is a widely used wire
medium, which offers a bandwidth of approximately 750 MHz. Such cables
are normally operated below 18 GHz. Communication through free space
using radio waves takes place over a very wide range of frequencies: from
a few hundreds of kHz to a few GHz. This range of frequencies is further
subdivided and allocated for various services as indicated in Table 15.2.
Optical communication using fibers is performed in the frequency range
of 1 THz to 1000 THz (microwaves to ultraviolet). An optical fiber can
offer a transmission bandwidth in excess of 100 GHz.
Spectrum allocations are arrived at by an international agreement.
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) administers the present
system of frequency allocations.Communication System
T ABLE 15.2 S OME IMPORTANT WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FREQUENCY BANDS
Service Frequency bands Standard AM broadcast 540-1600 kHz FM broadcast 88-108 MHz Television 54-72 MHz VHF (very high frequencies)
76-88 MHz TV
174-216 MHz UHF (ultra high frequencies)
420-890 MHz TV
896-901 MHz Mobile to base station
840-935 MHz Base station to mobile
5.925-6.425 GHz Uplink
3.7-4.2 GHz Downlink
Cellular Mobile Radio
Satellite Communication
15.6 P ROPAGATION
OF
Comments
E LECTROMAGNETIC W AVES
In communication using radio waves, an antenna at the transmitter
radiates the Electromagnetic waves (em waves), which travel through the
space and reach the receiving antenna at the other end. As the em wave
travels away from the transmitter, the strength of the wave keeps on
decreasing. Several factors influence the propagation of em waves and
the path they follow. At this point, it is also important to understand the
composition of the earth’s atmosphere as it plays a vital role in the
propagation of em waves. A brief discussion on some useful layers of the
atmosphere is given in Table 15.3.
15.6.1 Ground wave
To radiate signals with high efficiency, the antennas should have a size
comparable to the wavelength λ of the signal (at least ~ λ /4). At longer
wavelengths (i.e., at lower frequencies), the antennas have large physical
size and they are located on or very near to the ground. In standard AM
broadcast, ground based vertical towers are generally used as transmitting
antennas. For such antennas, ground has a strong influence on the
propagation of the signal. The mode of propagation is called surface wave
propagation and the wave glides over the surface of the earth. A wave
induces current in the ground over which it passes and it is attenuated
as a result of absorption of energy by the earth. The attenuation of surface
waves increases very rapidly with increase in frequency. The maximum
range of coverage depends on the transmitted power and frequency (less
than a few MHz).
519Physics
T ABLE 15.3 D IFFERENT LAYERS OF ATMOSPHERE AND THEIR INTERACTION WITH THE
PROPAGATING ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Name of the
stratum (layer) Approximate height
over earth’s surface Troposphere 10 km Day and
night VHF (up to several GHz)
65-75 km Day only Reflects LF, absorbs MF
and HF to some degree
100 km Day only Helps surface waves,
reflects HF
170-190 km Daytime,
merges with
F 2 at night Partially absorbs HF
waves yet allowing them
to reach F 2
300 km at night,
250-400 km
during daytime Day and
night Efficiently reflects HF
waves, particularly at
night
D (part of
stratosphere)
E (part of
Stratosphere)
F 1 (Part of
Mesosphere)
F 2
(Thermosphere)
P
A
R
T
S
Exists during
O
F
I
O
N
O
S
P
H
E
R
E
Frequencies most
affected
15.6.2 Sky waves
In the frequency range from a few MHz up to 30 to 40 MHz, long distance
communication can be achieved by ionospheric reflection of radio waves
back towards the earth. This mode of propagation is called sky wave
propagation and is used by short wave broadcast services. The ionosphere
is so called because of the presence of a large number of ions or charged
particles. It extends from a height of ~ 65 Km to about 400 Km above the
earth’s surface. Ionisation occurs due to the absorption of the ultraviolet
and other high-energy radiation coming from the sun by air molecules.
The ionosphere is further subdivided into several layers, the details of
which are given in Table 15.3. The degree of ionisation varies with the
height. The density of atmosphere decreases with height. At great heights
the solar radiation is intense but there are few molecules to be ionised.
Close to the earth, even though the molecular concentration is very high,
the radiation intensity is low so that the ionisation is again low. However,
at some intermediate heights, there occurs a peak of ionisation density.
The ionospheric layer acts as a reflector for a certain range of frequencies
(3 to 30 MHz). Electromagnetic waves of frequencies higher than 30 MHz
penetrate the ionosphere and escape. These phenomena are shown in the
Fig. 15.4. The phenomenon of bending of em waves so that they are
diverted towards the earth is similar to total internal reflection in optics*.
520
* Compare this with the phenomenon of mirage.Communication System
FIGURE 15.4 Sky wave propagation. The layer nomenclature
is given in Table 15.3.
15.6.3 Space wave
Another mode of radio wave propagation is by space waves. A space
wave travels in a straight line from transmitting antenna to the receiving
antenna. Space waves are used for line-of-sight (LOS) communication as
well as satellite communication. At frequencies above 40 MHz,
communication is essentially limited to line-of-sight paths. At these
frequencies, the antennas are relatively smaller and can be placed at
heights of many wavelengths above the ground. Because of line-of-sight
nature of propagation, direct waves get blocked at some point by the
curvature of the earth as illustrated in Fig. 15.5. If the signal is to be
received beyond the horizon then the receiving antenna must be high
enough to intercept the line-of-sight waves.
FIGURE 15.5 Line of sight communication by space waves.
If the transmitting antenna is at a height h T , then you can show that
the distance to the horizon d T is given as d T = 2 Rh T , where R is the
radius of the earth (approximately 6400 km). d T is also called the radio
horizon of the transmitting antenna. With reference to Fig. 15.5 the
maximum line-of-sight distance d M between the two antennas having
heights h T and h R above the earth is given by
d M =
2 Rh T + 2 Rh R
where h R is the height of receiving antenna.
(15.1)
521Physics
Television broadcast, microwave links and satellite communication
are some examples of communication systems that use space wave mode
of propagation. Figure 15.6 summarises the various modes of wave
propagation discussed so far.
FIGURE 15.6 Various propagation modes for em waves.
Example 15.1 A transmitting antenna at the top of a tower has a height
32 m and the height of the receiving antenna is 50 m. What is the
maximum distance between them for satisfactory communication in
LOS mode? Given radius of earth 6.4 × 10 6 m.
Solution
5
2
3
= 64 × 10 × 10 + 8 × 10 × 10 m
= 144 × 10 2 × 10 m = 45.5 km
15.7 M ODULATION
522
5
dm = 2 × 64 × 10 × 32 + 2 × 64 × 10 × 50 m
AND ITS
N ECESSITY
As already mentioned, the purpose of a communication system is to
transmit information or message signals. Message signals are also called
baseband signals, which essentially designate the band of frequencies
representing the original signal, as delivered by the source of information.
No signal, in general, is a single frequency sinusoid, but it spreads over a
range of frequencies called the signal bandwidth. Suppose we wish to
transmit an electronic signal in the audio frequency (AF) range (baseband
signal frequency less than 20 kHz) over a long distance directly. Let us
find what factors prevent us from doing so and how we overcome these
factors,Communication System
15.7.1 Size of the antenna or aerial
For transmitting a signal, we need an antenna or an aerial. This antenna
should have a size comparable to the wavelength of the signal (at least
λ /4 in dimension) so that the antenna properly senses the time variation
of the signal. For an electromagnetic wave of frequency 20 kHz, the
wavelength λ is 15 km. Obviously, such a long antenna is not possible to
construct and operate. Hence direct transmission of such baseband signals
is not practical. We can obtain transmission with reasonable antenna
lengths if transmission frequency is high (for example, if ν is 1 MHz, then
λ is 300 m). Therefore, there is a need of translating the information
contained in our original low frequency baseband signal into high or
radio frequencies before transmission.
15.7.2 Effective power radiated by an antenna
A theoretical study of radiation from a linear antenna (length l ) shows
that the power radiated is proportional to (l/ λ ) 2 . This implies that for the
same antenna length, the power radiated increases with decreasing λ ,
i.e., increasing frequency. Hence, the effective power radiated by a long
wavelength baseband signal would be small. For a good transmission,
we need high powers and hence this also points out to the need of using
high frequency transmission.
15.7.3 Mixing up of signals from different transmitters
Another important argument against transmitting baseband signals
directly is more practical in nature. Suppose many people are talking at
the same time or many transmitters are transmitting baseband information
signals simultaneously. All these signals will get
mixed up and there is no simple way to distinguish
between them. This points out towards a possible
solution by using communication at high
frequencies and allotting a band of frequencies to
each message signal for its transmission.
The above arguments suggest that there is a
need for translating the original low frequency
baseband message or information signal into high
frequency wave before transmission such that the
translated signal continues to possess the
information contained in the original signal. In
doing so, we take the help of a high frequency signal,
known as the carrier wave, and a process known
as modulation which attaches information to it. The
carrier wave may be continuous (sinusoidal) or in
the form of pulses as shown in Fig. 15.7.
FIGURE 15.7 (a) Sinusoidal, and
(b) pulse shaped signals.
A sinusoidal carrier wave can be represented as
c(t ) = A c sin ( ω c t + φ )
(15.2)
where c(t) is the signal strength (voltage or current), A c is the amplitude,
ω c ( = 2πν c ) is the angular frequency and φ is the initial phase of the carrier
wave. During the process of modulation, any of the three parameters, viz
A c , ω c and φ , of the carrier wave can be controlled by the message or
523Physics
information signal. This results in three types of modulation: (i) Amplitude
modulation (AM), (ii) Frequency modulation (FM) and
(iii) Phase modulation (PM), as shown in Fig. 15.8.
FIGURE 15.8 Modulation of a carrier wave: (a) a sinusoidal carrier wave;
(b) a modulating signal; (c) amplitude modulation; (d) frequency
modulation; and (e) phase modulation.
Similarly, the significant characteristics of a pulse are: pulse amplitude,
pulse duration or pulse Width, and pulse position (denoting the time of
rise or fall of the pulse amplitude) as shown in Fig. 15.7(b). Hence, different
types of pulse modulation are: (a) pulse amplitude modulation (PAM),
(b) pulse duration modulation (PDM) or pulse width modulation (PWM),
and (c) pulse position modulation (PPM). In this chapter, we shall confine
to amplitude modulation on ly.
15.8 A MPLITUDE M ODULATION
In amplitude modulation the amplitude of the carrier is varied in
accordance with the information signal. Here we explain amplitude
modulation process using a sinusoidal signal as the modulating signal.
Let c(t) = A c sin ω c t represent carrier wave and m(t) = A m sin ω m t represent
the message or the modulating signal where ω m = 2πf m is the angular
frequency of the message signal. The modulated signal c m (t ) can be
written as
c m (t) = (A c + A m sin ω m t) sin ω c t


A
= A c  1 + m sin ω m t  sin ω c t
(15.3)
A c


Note that the modulated signal now contains the message signal. This
can also be seen from Fig. 15.8(c). From Eq. (15.3), we can write,
524
c m ( t ) = A c sin ω c t + μ A c sin ω m t sin ω c t
(15.4)Communication System
Here μ = A m /A c is the modulation index; in practice, μ is kept ≤ 1 to avoid
distortion.
Using the trignomatric relation sinA sinB = 1⁄2 (cos(A – B) – cos (A + B),
we can write c m (t) of Eq. (15.4) as
c m ( t ) = A c sin ω c t +
μ A c
cos( ω c − ω m ) t −
μ A c
cos( ω c + ω m ) t
(15.5)
2
2
Here ω c – ω m and ω c + ω m are respectively called the lower side and upper
side frequencies. The modulated signal now consists of the carrier wave
of frequency ω c plus two sinusoidal waves each with a frequency slightly
different from, known as side bands. The frequency spectrum of the
amplitude modulated signal is shown in Fig. 15.9.
FIGURE 15.9 A plot of amplitude versus ω for
an amplitude modulated signal.
As long as the broadcast frequencies (carrier waves) are sufficiently
spaced out so that sidebands do not overlap, different stations can operate
without interfering with each other.
Solution
(a) Modulation index =10/20 = 0.5
(b) The side bands are at (1000+10 kHz)=1010 kHz and
(1000 –10 kHz) = 990 kHz.
15.9 P RODUCTION
OF
Example 15.2 A message signal of frequency 10 kHz and peak voltage
of 10 volts is used to modulate a carrier of frequency 1 MHz and peak
voltage of 20 volts. Determine (a) modulation index, (b) the side bands
produced.
A MPLITUDE M ODULATED W AVE
Amplitude modulation can be produced by a variety of methods. A
conceptually simple method is shown in the block diagram of Fig. 15.10.
FIGURE 15.10 Block diagram of a simple modulator
for obtaining an AM signal.
525Physics
Here the modulating signal A m sin ω m t is added to the carrier signal
A c sin ω c t to produce the signal x (t). This signal x (t) = A m sin ω m t
+ A c sin ω c t is passed through a square law device which is a non-linear
device which produces an output
y (t) = B x (t ) + Cx 2 (t )
(15.6)
where B and C are constants. Thus,
y (t)= BA m sin ω m t + BA c sin ω c t
+ C   A m 2 sin 2 ω m t + A c 2 sin 2 ω c t + 2 A m A c sin ω m t sin ω c t  
(15.7)
= BA m sin ω m t + BA c sin ω c t
C A m 2
C A m 2
C A c 2
+ A c 2 –
cos 2 ω m t –
cos 2 ω c t
2
2
2
+ CA m A c cos ( ω c – ω m ) t – CA m A c cos ( ω c + ω m ) t
+
(15.8)
2
where the trigonometric relations sin A = (1 – cos2A)/2 and the relation
for sin A sin B mentioned earlier are used.
(
In Eq. (15.8), there is a dc term C/2 A m 2 + A c 2
)
and sinusoids of
frequencies ω m , 2 ω m , ω c , 2 ω c, ω c – ω m and ω c + ω m . As shown in Fig. 15.10
this signal is passed through a band pass filter* which rejects dc and the
sinusoids of frequencies ω m , 2 ω m and 2 ω c and retains the frequencies ω c ,
ω c – ω m and ω c + ω m . The output of the band pass filter therefore is of the
same form as Eq. (15.5) and is therefore an AM wave.
It is to be mentioned that the modulated signal cannot be transmitted
as such. The modulator is to be followed by a power amplifier which
provides the necessary power and then the modulated signal is fed to an
antenna of appropriate size for radiation as shown in Fig. 15.11.
FIGURE 15.11 Block diagram of a transmitter.
15.10 D ETECTION OF A MPLITUDE M ODULATED W AVE
The transmitted message gets attenuated in propagating through the
channel. The receiving antenna is therefore to be followed by an amplifier
and a detector. In addition, to facilitate further processing, the carrier
frequency is usually changed to a lower frequency by what is called an
intermediate frequency (IF) stage preceding the detection. The detected
signal may not be strong enough to be made use of and hence is required
526
* A band pass filter rejects low and high frequencies and allows a band of frequencies
to pass through.Communication System
to be amplified. A block diagram of a typical receiver is shown in
Fig. 15.12
FIGURE 15.12 Block diagram of a receiver.
Detection is the process of recovering the modulating signal from the
modulated carrier wave. We just saw that the modulated carrier wave
contains the frequencies ω c and ω c ± ω m . In order to obtain the original
message signal m(t ) of angular frequency ω m , a simple method is shown
in the form of a block diagram in Fig. 15.13.
FIGURE 15.13 Block diagram of a detector for AM signal. The quantity
on y-axis can be current or voltage.
The modulated signal of the form given in (a) of fig. 15.13 is passed
through a rectifier to produce the output shown in (b). This envelope of
signal (b) is the message signal. In order to retrieve m (t ), the signal is
passed through an envelope detector (which may consist of a simple RC
circuit).
In the present chapter we have discussed some basic concepts of
communication and communication systems. We have also discussed
one specific type of analog modulation namely Amplitude Modulation
(AM). Other forms of modulation and digital communication systems play
an important role in modern communication. These and other exciting
developments are taking place everyday.
So far we have restricted our discussion to some basic communication
systems. Before we conclude this chapter, it is worth taking a glance at
some of the communication systems (see the box) that in recent times
have brought major changes in the way we exchange information even in
our day-to-day life:
527Physics
A DDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Internet
It is a system with billions of users worldwide. It permits communication and sharing of all
types of information between any two or more computers connected through a large and
complex network. It was started in 1960’s and opened for public use in 1990’s. With the
passage of time it has witnessed tremendous growth and it is still expanding its reach. Its
applications include
(i) E mail – It permits exchange of text/graphic material using email software. We can write a
letter and send it to the recipient through ISP’s (Internet Service Providers) who work like
the dispatching and receiving post offices.
(ii) File transfer – A FTP (File Transfer Programmes) allows transfer of files/software from one
computer to another connected to the Internet.
(iii) World Wide Web (WWW) – Computers that store specific information for sharing with others
provide websites either directly or through web service providers. Government
departments, companies, NGO’s (Non-Government Organisations) and individuals can post
information about their activities for restricted or free use on their websites. This information
becomes accessible to the users. Several search engines like Google, Yahoo! etc. help us in
finding information by listing the related websites. Hypertext is a powerful feature of the
web that automatically links relevant information from one page on the web to another
using HTML (hypertext markup language).
(iv) E-commerce – Use of the Internet to promote business using electronic means such as
using credit cards is called E-commerce. Customers view images and receive all the
information about various products or services of companies through their websites. They
can do on-line shopping from home/office. Goods are dispatched or services are provided
by the company through mail/courier.
(v) Chat – Real time conversation among people with common interests through typed
messages is called chat. Everyone belonging to the chat group gets the message
instantaneously and can respond rapidly.
Facsimile (FAX)
It scans the contents of a document (as an image, not text) to create electronic signals. These
signals are then sent to the destination (another FAX machine) in an orderly manner using
telephone lines. At the destination, the signals are reconverted into a replica of the original
document. Note that FAX provides image of a static document unlike the image provided by
television of objects that might be dynamic.
Mobile telephony
The concept of mobile telephony was developed first in 1970’s and it was fully implemented in
the following decade. The central concept of this system is to divide the service area into a
suitable number of cells centred on an office called MTSO (Mobile Telephone Switching Office).
Each cell contains a low-power transmitter called a base station and caters to a large number
of mobile receivers (popularly called cell phones). Each cell could have a service area of a few
square kilometers or even less depending upon the number of customers. When a mobile
receiver crosses the coverage area of one base station, it is necessary for the mobile user to be
transferred to another base station. This procedure is called handover or handoff. This process
is carried out very rapidly, to the extent that the consumer does not even notice it. Mobile
telephones operate typically in the UHF range of frequencies (about 800-950 MHz).
528Communication System
SUMMARY
1.
2.
Electronic communication refers to the faithful transfer of information
or message (available in the form of electrical voltage and current)
from one point to another point.
Transmitter, transmission channel and receiver are three basic units
of a communication system.
3. Two important forms of communication system are: Analog and Digital.
The information to be transmitted is generally in continuous waveform
for the former while for the latter it has only discrete or quantised
levels.
4. Every message signal occupies a range of frequencies. The bandwidth
of a message signal refers to the band of frequencies, which are necessary
for satisfactory transmission of the information contained in the signal.
Similarly, any practical communication system permits transmission
of a range of frequencies only, which is referred to as the bandwidth of
the system.
5. Low frequencies cannot be transmitted to long distances. Therefore,
they are superimposed on a high frequency carrier signal by a process
known as modulation.
6. In modulation, some characteristic of the carrier signal like amplitude,
frequency or phase varies in accordance with the modulating or message
signal. Correspondingly, they are called Amplitude Modulated (AM),
Frequency Modulated (FM) or Phase Modulated (PM) waves.
7. Pulse modulation could be classified as: Pulse Amplitude Modulation
(PAM), Pulse Duration Modulation (PDM) or Pulse Width Modulation
(PWM) and Pulse Position Modulation (PPM).
8. For transmission over long distances, signals are radiated into space
using devices called antennas. The radiated signals propagate as
electromagnetic waves and the mode of propagation is influenced by
the presence of the earth and its atmosphere. Near the surface of the
earth, electromagnetic waves propagate as surface waves. Surface wave
propagation is useful up to a few MHz frequencies.
9. Long distance communication between two points on the earth is
achieved through reflection of electromagnetic waves by ionosphere.
Such waves are called sky waves. Sky wave propagation takes place up
to frequency of about 30 MHz. Above this frequency, electromagnetic
waves essentially propagate as space waves. Space waves are used for
line-of-sight communication and satellite communication.
10. If an antenna radiates electromagnetic waves from a height h T , then
the range d T is given by
2 Rh T where R is the radius of the earth.
11. Amplitude modulated signal contains frequencies ( ω c – ω m ),
ω c and
( ω c + ω m ).
12. Amplitude modulated waves can be produced by application of the
message signal and the carrier wave to a non-linear device, followed by
a band pass filter.
13. AM detection, which is the process of recovering the modulating signal
from an AM waveform, is carried out using a rectifier and an envelope
detector.
529Physics
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
2.
3.
In the process of transmission of message/ information signal, noise gets
added to the signal anywhere between the information source and the
receiving end. Can you think of some sources of noise?
In the process of modulation, new frequencies called sidebands are generated
on either side (higher and lower than the carrier frequency) of the carrier by
an amount equal to the highest modulating frequency. Is it possible to
retrieve the message by transmitting (a) only the side bands, (b) only one
side band?
In amplitude modulation, modulation index μ ≤ 1 is used. What will happen
if μ > 1?
EXERCISES
15.1
Which of the following frequencies will be suitable for beyond-the-
horizon communication using sky waves?
(a) 10 kHz
(b) 10 MHz
(c) 1 GHz
(d) 1000 GHz
530
15.2 Frequencies in the UHF range normally propagate by means of:
(a) Ground waves.
(b) Sky waves.
(c) Surface waves.
(d) Space waves.
15.3 Digital signals
(i) do not provide a continuous set of values,
(ii) represent values as discrete steps,
(iii) can utilize binary system, and
(iv) can utilize decimal as well as binary systems.
Which of the above statements are true?
(a) (i) and (ii) only
(b) (ii) and (iii) only
(c) (i), (ii) and (iii) but not (iv)
(d) All of (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv).
15.4 Is it necessary for a transmitting antenna to be at the same height
as that of the receiving antenna for line-of-sight communication? A
TV transmitting antenna is 81m tall. How much service area can it
cover if the receiving antenna is at the ground level?
15.5 A carrier wave of peak voltage 12V is used to transmit a message
signal. What should be the peak voltage of the modulating signal in
order to have a modulation index of 75%?
15.6 A modulating signal is a square wave, as shown in Fig. 15.14.Communication System
FIGURE 15.14
15.7
15.8
The carrier wave is given by c ( t ) = 2 sin(8 π t ) volts.
(i) Sketch the amplitude modulated waveform
(ii) What is the modulation index?
For an amplitude modulated wave, the maximum amplitude is found
to be 10V while the minimum amplitude is found to be 2V. Determine
the modulation index, μ .
What would be the value of μ if the minimum amplitude is zero volt?
Due to economic reasons, only the upper sideband of an AM wave is
transmitted, but at the receiving station, there is a facility for
generating the carrier. Show that if a device is available which can
multiply two signals, then it is possible to recover the modulating
signal at the receiver station.
531
